Abstract: Comparing the timing of mass extinctions with the formation age of large igneous provinces reveals a close correspondence in five cases, but previous claims that all such provinces coincide with extinction events are unduly optimistic. The best correlation occurs for four consecutive mid-Phanerozoic examples, namely the end-Guadalupian extinctionrEmeishan flood basalts, the end-Permian extinctionrSiberian Traps, the end-Triassic extinctionrcentral Atlantic volcanism and the early Toarcian extinctionrKaroo Traps. Curiously, the onset of eruptions slightly post-dates the main phase of extinctions in these examples. Of the seven post-Karoo provinces, only the Deccan Traps coincide with a mass extinction, but in this case, the nature of the biotic crisis is best reconciled with the effects of a major bolide impact. Intraoceanic volcanism may also be implicated in a relatively minor end-Cenomanian extinction crisis, although once again the main phase of volcanism occurs after the crisis. The link between large igneous province formation and extinctions remains enigmatic; volume of extrusives and extinction intensity are unrelated and neither is there any apparent relationship Z . with the rapidity of province formation. Violence of eruptions proportions of pyroclastics also appears unimportant. Six out of 11 provinces coincide with episodes of global warming and marine anoxiardysoxia, a relationship that suggests that volcanic CO emissions may have an important effect on global climate. Conversely, there is little, if any, geological 2 evidence for cooling associated with continental flood basalt eruptions suggesting little long-term impact of SO emissions. 2 Large carbon isotope excursions are associated with some extinction events and intervals of flood basalt eruption but these are too great to be accounted for by the release of volcanic CO alone. Thus, voluminous volcanism may in some 2 Z . circumstances trigger calamitous global environmental changes runaway greenhouses , perhaps by causing the dissociation of gas hydrates. The variable efficiency of global carbon sinks during volcanic episodes may be an important control on environmental effects and may explain why the eruption of some vast igneous provinces, such as the ParanaEtendeka Traps, have little perceptible climatic impact. q 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 15. Conclusion: Z .As Courtillot 1999 remarked, there is a Aremarkable correlationB between the age of flood basalt provinces and mass extinction. However, his concluZsion that Athe correlation is almost perfectB Courtil.lot, 1999, p. 97 is too optimistic, particularly ifPalaeozoic mass extinctions are considered. This review reveals the following relationships:Z .1 Of the 15 major Phanerozoic extinctions, only six coincide with major episodes of volcanicity. However, all extinction events of the last 300 Ma coincide with LIPs, with. the best correlation occurring for the 4 mid-Phanerozoic event that began withthe end-Guadalupian mass extinction. Subsequent extinctions have been less intense, with the exception of the KT event whose magnitude is likely due to the effects of bolide impact not volcanism.Z .2 For many LIPs, the onset of eruptions, or the interval immediately before this, appears to coincide with the extinction interval, perhaps suggesting that volcanicity triggered harmful environmental change.Z .3 The eruption volume of flood basalt provinces Z .is unrelated to extinction intensity Fig. 9 , andneither is their duration, which once again argues for their role in triggering further change, such as gas hydrate release.Z .4 Episodes of global warmingrmarine anoxia show the best correlation with flood basalt volcanism Z .Table 1 . Thus, all post-Palaeozoic oceanic anoxic Zevents coincide with intervals of LIP formation e.g. Keith, 1982; Sinton and Duncan, 1997; Kerr, 1998; .Jenkyns, 1999 . This connection may be connected with volcanic CO emission, particularly if the2 warming effect is exacerbated by gas hydrate dissociation. However, it is an unresolved paradox that these warmingranoxia events are associated with Zboth major mass extinctions e.g. the end-Permian . Zevent , modest extinctions, e.g. the end-Cenomanian . Zevent , very minor extinctions e.g. the late . ZPalaeocene and no extinctions at all e.g. the Early .Cretaceous Selli Event .Z . Z .5 The duration of volcanogenic? oceanic anoxia varies greatly. Thus, the PTr marine anoxic event persisted for several million years, whereas the Late Palaeocene thermal maximum lasted for only 100 ka. The efficiency of C sinks, and their ability to drawdown atmospheric CO levels may control the2 duration of Arunaway greenhouseB intervals and thus their impact on the worlds biota. This efficiency appears to have undergone a secular increase in the past 300 Ma, with early Mesozoic volcanism having substantially more environmental impact than Tertiary volcanism.
Stable isotope records across the Cretaceous-Paleogene transition, Stevns Klint, Denmark: New insights from the chromium isotope system  Abstract: Late Cretaceous to Early Paleogene time represents a critical transitional period in Earth history. Global events include short-term instability in climate and ocean circulation, large igneous province emplacement, and catastrophic extinction of marine and terrestrial fauna due at least in part to a bolide impact event. The response of the ocean system to Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) global events has been the subject of much research, yet fundamental questions remain regarding carbon cycling, climate, ocean mixing, and redox conditions. To help elucidate paleoceanographic changes across the KPg transition, we revisit the classic Maastrichtian to Danian chalk-limestone succession at Stevns Klint, Denmark with a suite of new geochemical data, including insights from the redox-sensitive chromium isotope system. We use carbon and oxygen isotope trends to form a well-constrained framework for the succession, before presenting strontium isotope, chromium isotope, and rare-earth element data for the units deposited both before and after the K-Pg event. Carbon isotopes show only minor perturbation across the K-Pg boundary and oxygen isotopes record a prominent positive excursion, with both of these trends standing in contrast to many K-Pg boundary sections worldwide. Strontium isotopes record a spike towards more radiogenic values, which is consistent with a globally-observed, short-term weathering pulse. The chromium isotope profile of Maastrichtian chalk begins with strongly positive values followed by a sharp negative excursion associated with a facies shift and initiation of bottom currents in the Chalk Sea. dCr values then recover, before falling steadily across the K-Pg boundary and into the Danian limestone. Chromium isotope trends do not correspond to changes in hydrothermal input or basin redox conditionsinstead, we propose that mixing of water masses with distinct chromium isotope signatures controlled temporal chromium isotope variability. The local mixing event inferred from our Maastrichtian chromium isotope data could be related to a temporary inflow of Tethyan bottom waters, or the shift from end-Maastrichtian greenhouse warming (associated with Deccan volcanism) to the worldwide cooling phase that immediately preceded the K-Pg boundary. No immediate change in chromium isotopes is recorded across the K-Pg boundary, indicating that the bolide impactor did not substantially perturb the marine chromium cycle, at least at the scale resolvable by our data. Instead, chromium isotope trends https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2018.04.028 0016-7037/ 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Corresponding author at: Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Earth Sciences, George Mason University, USA. E-mail address: ggilleau@gmu.edu (G.J. Gilleaudeau). 306 G.J. Gilleaudeau et al. /Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 235 (2018) 305332 continued to be controlled by local oceanographic processes, highlighting the potential of the chromium isotope system to record isotopic heterogeneity and mixing events in ancient oceans. 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 6. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we present an extensive new geochemical dataset spanning the Cretaceous-Paleogene transition at Stevns Klint, Denmark. Carbon and oxygen isotopes provide a general framework for the succession, and we further report strontium isotope, trace element, and rare-earth element data. Our focus, however, is on the novel chromium isotope system before and after the K-Pg event. Together, these data help elucidate oceanographic changes in the Danish Chalk Sea across this critical transition in Earth history. Carbon isotopes show only minor perturbation in bulk sediments across the K-Pg boundary, whereas oxygen isotopes record a prominent positive excursion. These trends are in contrast to some classic K-Pg boundary sections worldwide, which could reflect a degree of restriction between the Danish Basin and the open ocean. Strontium isotopes record a spike towards more radiogenic values above the K-Pg boundary, which is consistent with global trends that suggest a short-lived episode of enhanced terrestrial weathering associated with the K-Pg event.Maastrichtian to Danian strata of the Danish Basin are also ideal for measuring chromium isotopes because of theG.J. Gilleaudeau et al. /Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 235 (2018) 305332 329general lack of diagenetic alteration and detrital contamination. d53Cr values are strongly positive in the Maastrichtian Sigerslev Member (the White Chalk), followed by a prominent negative excursion across the SigerslevHjerup transition. Chromium isotope values then rise through the middle Hjerup Member (the Grey Chalk), before falling steadily across the K-Pg boundary. This signal is generally reproducible at several other localities across the Stevns Peninsula. Comparison to stratigraphic trends in strontium isotopes, the europium anomaly, and the redox-sensitive cerium anomaly suggest that chromium isotope trends were not controlled by either hydrothermal input to the basin or prevailing redox conditions. Instead, we propose that temporal chromium isotope trends were controlled by the mixing of water masses with distinct chromium isotope signatures in an isotopically heterogeneous Chalk Sea. This hypothesis is supported by association of the most prominent Maastrichtian chromium isotope excursion with sedimentological evidence for a distinct facies shift, development of seafloor topography, and initiation of bottom currents in the Chalk Sea. The potential mixing event recorded by this excursion could be related to the shift from end-Maastrichtian greenhouse warming (associated with Deccan volcanism) to the worldwide cooling phase that immediately preceded the K-Pg boundary. Contrary to expectation, no sharp change in chromium isotopes is recorded across the K-Pg boundary, suggesting that chromium cycling in the Danish Basin was not significantly perturbed by the K-Pg impact event, at least at the scale resolvable by our data. Instead, local oceanographic processes continued to be the prevailing control on chromium isotope trends, providing an example whereby chromium isotopes can be used as an oceanographic proxy in ancient carbonate-dominated depositional systems.
Carbon sequestration activated by a volcanic CO2 pulse during Ocean Anoxic Event 2  Abstract: The Cretaceous Ocean Anoxic Event 2 (about 94 million years ago) is thought to be linked to extensive volcanism, which triggered a biogeochemical chain of events that eventually led to widespread marine anoxia and a remarkable increase in carbon burial in marine sediments13. It has been suggested that the event was accompanied by a substantial decrease in atmospheric CO2 concentrations4, but the quantification of the drawdown remains controversial5,6. Here we reconstruct atmospheric CO2 concentrations throughout the ocean anoxic event from counts of the stomata in fossil leaves, and use terrestrial carbon isotopes to link the reconstruction to marine records of the event7,8. We find that before the onset of ocean anoxia, atmospheric CO2 concentrations increased by 20% over background levels of 370/70 ppm. This was part of a long-term rise in atmospheric CO2 levels, presumably caused by volcanism, which reached a peak of 500/180 ppm. However, two pulses of extensive carbon burial during the ocean anoxic event, as indicated by positive carbon isotope excursions, are associated with decreased atmospheric CO2 concentrations. We conclude that the sequestration of marine organic carbon led to a decrease in atmospheric CO2 concentration of up to 26% during Ocean Anoxic Event 2. During Cretaceous oceanic anoxic events (OAEs), the rate and magnitude of organic carbon production and preservation were greatly elevated from typical background Cretaceous levels for periods of a half to one million years9. They are defined in the rock record by widely traceable intervals of laminated fine-grained strata (Fig. 1) with elevated organic carbon content10 and 24h positive excursions in 13C of carbonate and organic carbon, respectively8,11. Ocean Anoxic Event 2 (OAE2), which brackets the CenomanianTuronian boundary, records a major disturbance in the global carbon cycle when global temperatures were at their highest level for the past 115million years (Myr; ref. 12). On the basis of carbon isotope data4, it was argued that the burial of marine organic carbon associated with OAE2 might have been sufficient to shift the ocean to a net carbon sink. The resulting drawdown in pCO2 could have produced a transient cooling of the prevailing greenhouse climate of the Late Cretaceous period4. Previous efforts to test for pCO2 drawdown during OAE2 (refs 5, 6) provide indirect support for the carbon sequestration hypothesis4. However, these studies have focused solely on marine records and there are significant uncertainties associated with the pCO2 proxies used (for example, geoporphyrin-based p reconstruction in epeiric settings5, and interpretations depending on undocumented early evolution of C4 plants in the Cretaceous period6). Here we present a high-resolution atmospheric palaeo-pCO2 reconstruction across the onset of OAE2 based on the stomatal index method13. The stomatal index method is founded on a genetically controlled inverse relationship between pCO2 and the