__label__NEGATE  Paleoceanographic significance of high-resolution carbon isotope records across the CenomanianTuronian boundary in the Western Interior and New Jersey coastal plain, USA  Abstract: Carbon isotope measurements have been made on bulk carbonate and organic matter in three sections across the Cenomanian Turonian boundary. The stratigraphy records the positive carbon isotopic excursion that is associated with the major oceanic anoxic event (OAE2). Comparison of TOC and isotopic data in sections from a range of different environments suggests that the positive excursion is a response to increased burial of organic matter in the deep ocean. The lack of coupled negative shifts in yCorg and y Ccarb records at the onset of OAE2 does not support a causal role for volcanism or methane hydrate dissociation. D 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 5. Conclusions: High-resolution carbon isotope stratigraphy ofthree sections across the base of OAE2 near theCenomanianTuronian boundary shows the well-documented positive excursion. Comparison withTOC data suggests that the carbon isotopic signalis driven by changes in the burial rates of organicmatter in the deep ocean rather than in shallow marine locations. Small (0.51.0x) changes in y13Corg can be correlated between sections allowing for higher resolution correlation than available using traditional biostratigraphy. Coupled y13Corg and y13Ccarb records do not support input of mantle CO2 or dissociation of methane hydrate at the onset of the event. Thus, our data do not support avolcanic or hydrate trigger for OAE2. It is possiblethat the mantle carbon signal corresponding to theCaribbean LIP was masked by the burial of organicmatter at the onset of OAE2. 
__label__SUPPORT  CHRONOSTRATIGRAPHIC FRAMEWORK FOR UPPER CAMPANIAN-MAASTRICHTIAN SEDIMENTS ON THE BLAKE NOSE (SUBTROPICAL NORTH ATLANTIC)  Abstract: A new chronostratigraphic framework is presented for upper Campanian-Maastrichtian pelagic sediments cored at DSDP/ODP Sites 390A/1049, 1050, and 1052, which were drilled across a 1300-m depth transect on the Blake Nose (subtropical western Atlantic Ocean). The planktonic foraminiferal zonation is based on standard global biozones for this interval, but rare and sporadic occurrence of two zonal biomarkers, Gansserina gansseri and Globotruncana aegyptiaca, precludes reliable identification of the nominate zones for those species. The Pseudoguembelina palpebra Partialrange Zone is defined as a means of subdividing this upper Campanian biostratigraphic interval. Planktonic foraminiferal, calcareous nannofossil and paleomagnetic datums are integrated to construct reliable age-depth curves for each of the Blake Nose drill sites. These age models are largely confirmed by Sr-isotopic data and suggest significant unconformities at various positions within the sections. Compilation of stable isotope datasets for this time interval from the Blake Nose sites reveals no significant shifts in dO and dC at the time of the inoceramid bivalve extinction (now dated as 68.568.7 Ma in the Blake Nose sections) and no correlation with proposed Campanian-Maastrichtian glacial intervals. However, benthic warming associated with Deccan volcanism during the late Maastrichtian is supported. CONCLUSIONS: Age-depth models are created for the upper CampanianMaastrichtian interval recovered from DSDP/ODP Holes 390A/1049C and ODP Holes 1050C and 1052E, which were drilled along a middle to upper bathyal depth transect on the Blake Nose in the subtropical North Atlantic Ocean. These age models are constructed using published and reinterpreted magneto-, chemo-, and biostratigraphic datums along with new biostratigraphic observations, all ofTABLE 6. Age and duration (m.y.) of upper CampanianMaastrichtian unconformities on the Blake Nose.Base (Ma) Top (Ma) Duration (m.y.)Hole 390A 69.22 66.86 2.35 75.04 74.62 0.42 110.00 75.55 34.45 Hole 1049C68.85 66.94 1.91 75.05 73.90 1.15 110.00 75.57 34.43 Hole 1050C65.56 65.50 0.06 67.44 66.78 0.66 75.04 71.62 3.42 87.30 77.10 10.20 Hole 1052E 65.78 65.50 0.23 67.52 66.49 1.03 69.34 68.82 0.52 96.80 71.04 25.76Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/cushmanfoundation/jfr/article-pdf/38/2/162/3025624/162.pdf by University of Arizona user on 26 February 2019which are age calibrated using the Gradstein and others (2004) geomagnetic time scale. The revised age models enable greater accuracy in chronostratigraphic correlation, characterization of changes in sedimentation rates, and determination of the stratigraphic position, timing, and duration of unconformities. These refinements provide a much more reliable framework for interpretation of biotic and paleoceanographic changes that occurred during the last 10 m.y. of the Cretaceous Period as observed on the Blake Nose.The relative order and timing of a majority of the planktonic foraminiferal and calcareous nannofossil datum events identified at the Blake Nose sites show very good agreement among sites. Exceptions among the planktonic foraminifera include the zonal marker species Globotruncana aegyptiaca and Gansserina gansseri, which both have rare and sporadic distributions at the Blake Nose drill sites. Because recognition of the G. gansseri and G. aegyptiaca Zones is deemed unreliable, we define a new Pseudoguembelina palpebra Interval Zone for biostratigraphic subdivision between the Globotruncanella havanensis Partial-range Zone and the Racemiguembelina fructicosa Partial-range Zone. The FAD of P. palpebra is calibrated as 71.64 Ma. Secondary planktonic foraminiferal datum ages that are estimated from mean values obtained from the Blake Nose age models include: (1) the LAD of Gansserina gansseri 5 65.93 Ma, (2) the LAD of Contusotruncana patelliformis 5 66.20, (3) the LAD of Globotruncana linneiana 5 67.86 Ma, (4) the LAD of Globotruncana bulloides 5 68.80 Ma, (5) the LAD of Contusotruncana fornicata 5 68.98 Ma, (6) the FAD of Pseudotextularia elegans 5 69.02 Ma, (7) the FAD of Planoglobulina acervulinoides 5 69.55 Ma, (8) the FAD of Contusotruncana contusa 5 70.5 Ma, (9) the FAD of Pseudoguembelina kempensis 5 71.50 Ma, (10) the FAD of Racemiguembelina powelli 5 70.98 Ma and (11) the FAD of Pseudoguembelina excolata 5 74.40 Ma.Revision of the late Campanian-Maastrichtian chronology for the Blake Nose sites has an important bearing on paleoceanographic interpretations that have been made based on data generated from the drill cores and in correlation with data from other regions. Of particular interest is determination whether reorganization of the sources and patterns of deep- and intermediate-water circulation played a role in biotic changes, particularly the extinction of inoceramid bivalves. The extinction of inoceramid bivalves is now dated between 68.5 and 68.7 Ma on the Blake Nose. Combined stable isotope datasets published for the Blake Nose sites do not show any significant change in foraminiferal, bulk- and finefractioncarbonate d18O and d13C values in this interval.The new chronology also provides reliable constraints on the timing and duration of Late Cretaceous unconformities across the Blake Nose transect. A mid-Maastrichtian unconformity with a duration ranging between 0.7 and 1.9 m.y. is identified at all three sites across the 1300-mdepth transect. Several additional unconformities occur within the upper Campanian, and the oldest of these spans the period from 10.2 to 34.4 m.y. The more precise age dating of these unconformities will provide a framework for understanding their cause and regional to global extent.T A B L E 7 . D ep th s a n d ca lc ula ted ag esfo rse con da ryp lan kto nic fora min ifer al da tum sid enti fied inth eB lak eN ose dri llh ole s.A ge dif fere nce bet wee nm ax imu ma nd min imu ma ges sho wn inp are nth eses .D ash essh ow nw her ed atu ma ge isu nce rta inb eca use of the pre sen ceo fa nu nco nfo rmit y.P lan kto nic fora min ifer spec ies Da tumH ole 1 0 4 9 CH ole 1 0 5 0 CH ole 1 0 5 2 EM ean a g e(M a )T op dep th(m bsf )B ott om dep th(m bsf )A g e (M a )T op dep th(m bsf )B ott om dep th(m bsf )A g e (M a )T op dep th(m bsf )B ott om dep th(m bsf )A g e (M a )G an sser ina ga nss eri LA D1 13 .20 11 3.4 76 5.5 74 12 .50 41 2.9 66 5.9 53 20 .04 32 2.0 26 6.2 76 5.9 3(0 .70 )C on tuso tru nca na pa tell ifo rmis LA D1 25 .47 12 5.5 6 41 3.7 04 13 .88 66 .00 32 4.9 13 26 .02 66 .40 66 .20 (0.4 0 ) G lo b o tr u n ca n a li n n ei a n a L A D 1 2 5 .4 7 1 2 5 .5 6 4 2 8 .9 3 4 2 9 .9 9 6 7 .5 3 3 6 7 .9 4 3 6 8 .8 5 6 8 .1 9 6 7 .8 6 (0 .6 6 ) G lo b o tr u n ca n a b u ll o id es L A D 1 2 5 .5 6 1 2 6 .5 4 4 5 2 .5 0 4 5 4 .0 8 6 8 .8 3 3 5 8 .5 4 3 5 4 .7 2 6 7 .9 4 6 8 .3 4 (0 .8 9 ) C o n tu so tr u n ca n a fo rn ic a ta L A D 1 2 5 .5 6 1 2 6 .5 4 4 5 2 .1 8 4 5 2 .5 0 6 8 .7 8 3 8 3 .4 9 3 8 4 .7 3 6 8 .5 4 6 8 .6 6 (0 .2 4 ) P se u d o te x tu la ri a el eg a n s F A D 1 2 5 .5 6 1 2 6 .5 4 6 6 .6 2 4 5 1 .8 2 4 5 2 .1 8 6 8 .7 6 3 8 8 .2 4 3 9 1 .2 7 6 8 .6 8 6 9 .0 2 (0 .9 4 ) P la n o g lo b u li n a a ce rv u li n o id es F A D 1 2 5 .5 6 1 2 6 .5 4 6 9 .6 2 4 6 2 .1 7 4 6 3 .5 5 6 9 .9 8 3 9 3 .0 9 3 9 4 .2 6 6 9 .0 5 6 9 .5 5 (0 .9 3 ) P la n o g lo b u li n a m u lt ic a m er a ta F A D 1 2 5 .5 6 1 2 6 .5 4 6 9 .6 2 4 6 5 .7 4 4 6 7 .2 0 7 0 .4 1 4 2 3 .2 7 4 2 4 .2 2 7 0 .0 6 7 0 .0 3 (0 .7 9 ) C o n tu so tr u n ca n a co n tu sa F A D 1 2 7 .0 3 1 2 8 .0 0 7 1 .0 4 4 6 2 .1 7 4 6 3 .5 5 6 9 .9 8 4 3 4 .6 1 4 4 5 .2 2 7 0 .3 9 7 0 .4 7 (1 .0 6 ) R a ce m ig u em b el . p o w el li F A D 1 2 7 .0 3 1 2 8 .0 0 7 1 .0 4 4 8 1 .6 9 4 8 2 .2 4 4 5 5 .9 7 4 6 5 .1 2 7 0 .9 2 7 0 .9 8 (0 .1 2 ) P se u d o g u em b el . k em p en si s F A D 1 2 6 .5 4 1 2 7 .0 3 7 0 .3 3 4 6 5 .1 2 4 6 8 .2 7 7 3 .2 6 4 6 5 .1 2 4 6 8 .2 7 7 0 .9 1 7 1 .5 0 (2 .9 3 ) P se u d o g u em b el . p a lp eb ra F A D 1 2 8 .0 0 1 2 8 .4 9 7 1 .7 5 4 7 6 .5 5 4 7 8 .1 5 7 1 .5 4 4 7 3 .7 0 4 7 4 .3 0 7 1 .6 4 (0 .2 1 ) P se u d o g u em b el . ex co la ta F A D 1 3 0 .2 0 1 3 0 .7 0 7 3 .8 9 4 7 6 .5 5 4 7 8 .1 5 7 4 .9 0 7 4 .4 0 (1 .0 1 )Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/cushmanfoundation/jfr/article-pdf/38/2/162/3025624/162.pdf by University of Arizona user on 26 February 2019 
__label__SUPPORT  A 200-year record of gale frequency, Edinburgh, Scotland: possible link with high-magnitude volcanic eruptions  Abstract: Most research concerned with the relationship between volcanic activity and global climate change has focused on the impacts that volcanoes have on atmospheric temperature. Very little attention, however, has been given to the effect of volcanic eruptions on patterns of storminess. Here we present a historical record of gale-day frequency for Edinburgh, Scotland, extending from AD 1780 to 1988 (the Mossman-Hickey chronology), which we believe represents the longest historical record of gales in Europe. Calculation of galeday frequency for this time interval shows three clear peaks in storminess that follow the volcanic eruptions of Tambora (1815), Krakatoa (1883) and El Chichon (1982). It appears that the greatest periods of storminess evident in the Edinburgh record during the last 200 years have taken place during relatively short intervals following major episodes of volcanism. If correct, the processes linking high-magnitude volcanic eruptions to storminess in the North Atlantic need to be included in IPCC research that presently focuses most attention on linkages between increased storminess and the effects of global warming. 
__label__SUPPORT  Possible correlation of Oligocene climate changes with Ethiopian Oligocene ignimbrite eruptions  Abstract: The Oligocene Ethiopian continental flood basalt province (ca. 2931 Ma) contains significant silicic pyroclastic rocks (>60,000 km constituting up to 20% of the volcanic stratigraphy). Rhyolitic tephras, synchronous with the Ethiopian silicic pyroclastic rocks, are found in Indian Ocean ODP holes 711A. They are geochemically akin to the Ethiopian silicic pyroclastic rocks. This suggests that the Indian Ocean tephras originated from Ethiopian silicic eruptions and represents more distal fallout of this volcanism. The temporal coincidence of the Ethiopian flood volcanism with the Oligocene global cooling event (Oi2 30.3 Ma) and the emplacement of the Ethiopian silicic pyroclastic eruptions on a near-global scale strongly suggest that the Ethiopian continental flood basalt province may have contributed or at least accelerated the climate change that was already underway. 
__label__SUPPORT  The midCretaceous North Atlantic nutrient trap: Black shales and OAEs  Abstract: [1] Organicrich sediments are the salient marine sedimentation product in the midCretaceous of the ocean basins formed in the Mesozoic. Oceanic anoxic events (OAEs) are discrete and particularly organicrich intervals within these midCretaceous organicrich sequences and are defined by pronounced carbon isotope excursions. Marine productivity during OAEs appears to have been enhanced by the increased availability of biolimiting nutrients in seawater due to hydrothermal alteration of submarine basalts in the Pacific and proto Indian oceans. The exact mechanisms behind the deposition of organicrich sediments in the midCretaceous are still a matter of discussion, but a hypothesis which is often put forward is that their deposition was a consequence of the coupling of a particular paleogeography with changes in ocean circulation and nutrient supply. In this study, we used a global coupled climate model to investigate oceanic processes that affect the interbasinal exchange of nutrients as well as their spatial distribution and bioavailability. We conclude that the midCretaceous North Atlantic was a nutrient trap as a consequence of an estuarine circulation with respect to the Pacific. Organicrich sediments in the North Atlantic were deposited below regions of intense upwelling. We suggest that enhanced productivity during OAEs was a consequence of upwelling of Pacific derived nutrientrich seawater associated with submarine igneous events. 4. Conclusions: [29] In the midCretaceous, the productivity associated with the formation of black shales was triggered by changes in ocean circulation whereby the Mesozoic ocean basins, the North Atlantic in particular, became estuarine with respect to the Pacific Ocean. This oceanographic regime transformed the North Atlantic into a nutrient trap and promoted conditions of low oxygen, low carbonate, high heavy/trace metals and the accumulation of organicrich sediments on the seafloor below regions of intense wind driven upwelling. [30] The accumulation and preservation of marine organic matter in these sediments was enhanced by midCretaceous warm seawater temperatures, i.e., lower seawater oxygensolubility, and by midCretaceous transgressive pulses which prevented dilution of the neritic sediments by siliciclastics. [31] OAEs occur intercalated with these organicrich sediments and are characterized by higher TOC, important elemental anomalies and globally synchronous perturbations in the carbon isotope record. Furthermore, they are coeval with important submarine volcanic events in the Pacific. For this reason, we suggest that intermediate seawater entering the North Atlantic through the Central American Seaway was more nutrient rich during OAEs even though the oceanographic mechanism leading to the deposition of organicrich sediments essentially remained unchanged.[32] Acknowledgments. We thank Henk Brinkhuis, Frits Hilgen, Peter Kraal, Paul Meijer, Haydon Mort, Cees van Oosterhout, Caroline Slomp and Robin Topper for discussions and/or reading of the manuscript. Michael Kliphuis for technical model support and Nikki Bos for technical help producing the figures. We thank Atsushi Utsunomiya for providing us with the base map used in Figure 1. We thank Tim Bralower, Michele Caron, Joerg Mutterlose, Harilaos Tsikos and Silke Voigt for kindly providing us with their data used for producing Figure 3. We are grateful to the editor, Christopher Charles, and to the reviewers, Xiaona Li, Katja Meyer and Silke Severmann, for their helpful suggestions and constructive comments which have greatly improved this manuscript. The project is funded by Senter Novem. 
__label__SUPPORT  Tectonic controls on atmospheric, climatic, and biological evolution 3.52.4 Ga  Abstract: This paper presents a speculative scenario for the evolution of the earths surface environment and biological community 3.52.4 Ga based on the geologic record and its interpretation. Available geologic evidence suggests that the earths climate before 3.2 Ga was hot, probably 6073 C, as a result of a CO2 and CH4 greenhouse. The early biological community was probably dominated by anoxygenic photosynthetic thermophiles. Cyanobacteria, if they evolved before 3.1 Ga, would have struggled to survive at such high temperatures. As a result, the atmosphere contained extremely low levels of O2 and 33S shows wide departures from 0 indicating mass independent fractionation of S isotopes in the upper atmosphere. This hot early climate collapsed 3.13.0 Ga due to growth of large new blocks of continental crust (cratons), the weathering of which resulted in the depletion of atmospheric CO2 and eventual drawdown of CH4 due to formation and rainout of methane aerosols. Cooling may have culminated in glaciation about 3.02.9 Ga. This climatic catastrophe and attendant changes in atmospheric composition drove a major biological revolution 3.02.7 Ga characterized by the emergence of new low-temperature taxa, including cyanobacteria, and their spread throughout surface environments at the expense of extreme thermophiles, including methanogens. During a period of general tectonic stability, 3.02.7 Ga, the earths surface was characterized by overall clement conditions with temperatures <60 C, abundant cyanobacteria and the formation of associated three-dimensional stromatolites, and a mild oxygenation of the atmosphere and attendant reduction in mass independent fractionation. As the cratons that had formed 3.13.0 Ga were eroded down and gradually covered by sediments, tectonic recycling and a burst of new greenstone-belt volcanism began to increase atmospheric CO2 after 2.75 Ga and by 2.7 Ga surface temperatures had returned to >60 C. Cyanobacteria were again suppressed, O2 production waned, and atmospheric mass independent fractionation is again indicated by extreme variations in 33S. These conditions persisted, perhaps intermittently, until about 2.52.4 Ga, when weathering and erosion of vast new blocks of continental crust formed about 2.652.6 Ga caused the second, and probably last collapse of a >60 C surface climate. Broad tectonic, climatic, and biological events 3.52.9 Ga are remarkably parallel to those of the Late Archean and Paleoproterozoic 2.752.2 Ga and Neoproterozoic 1.00.50 Ga. These 500-myr long cycles of greenstone volcanism and crustal generation; climatic and atmospheric instability; and biological innovation reflect the long-term interaction of the tectonic, atmospheric, climatic, and biological components of the earths surface system. They suggest that the evolution of the earths interior, expressed through its control on the formation of large blocks of continental crust, has influenced atmospheric composition and climate which in turn have provided a fundamental control on the timing and directions of biological evolution throughout earth history. 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
__label__SUPPORT  Calibration of chron C29r: New high-precision geochronologic and paleomagnetic constraints from the Hell Creek region, Montana  Abstract: The mass extinction at the CretaceousPaleogene boundary marks one of the most important biotic turnover events in Earth history. Yet, despite decades of study, the causes of the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary crises remain under debate. An important tool that has the capacity to greatly improve our understanding of the events around the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary is the geomagnetic polarity time scale (GPTS). The GPTS is used for age control in numerous Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary studies, including the timing of Deccan Traps volcanism, a majority of studies in marine sections, and studies on climate and ecological change across the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary. The current calibration of the GPTS for circumCretaceous-Paleogene boundary polarity chrons (C30nC28n) from the Geologic Time Scale draws heavily on astronomical tuning and uses a 40Ar/39Ar age for the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary as a tie point that has since been shown to be 200 ka too old. Furthermore, complex sedimentation has been recorded in marine sections immediately following the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary, which can possibly obscure orbital signals and complicate cyclostratigraphic interpretation. An independent test of the cyclostratigraphy for this time period is imperative for confidence in the astronomical time scale. Further, polarity reversal ages given in the GPTS do not include uncertainty estimates, making them unsuitable for quanti- CONCLUSIONS: We calculated a duration of 587 53 ka for C29r based on 14 new magnetostratigraphic sections and 18 new 40Ar/39Ar tephra ages from the Hell Creek region, Montana. This result is consistent with past estimates for the age and duration of this chron based on cyclostratigraphy and U/Pb geochronology. The previous estimate for the duration of C29r of ~350 ka, presented in Sprain et al. (2015), is shown to be incorrect due to errors in reversal placement in two different magnetostratigraphic sections presented in Archibald et al. (1982) and LeCain et al. (2014). These errors are probably due to unremoved normal overprints, likely held by goethite, which cannot be removed by AF-only demagnetization techniques. This result calls for the reevaluation of magnetostratigraphic frameworks developed in central North American basins that were determined using only AF demagnetization techniques (e.g., the San Juan Basin), especially in locations where the placement of NALMA faunas is not consistent with other regional basins. Despite errors found in past reversal placement, our results confirm the previous placement of NALMA fauna into the magnetostratigraphic framework for the Hell Creek region: La: Cretaceous C29r, Pu1: Paleogene C29r, and Pu3: C29n.Using our new calibration for C29r, we can begin to tie records of biotic and abiotic change around the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary from both marine and terrestrial sections to records of Deccan volcanism. Tentative first analysis agrees with past assessments that pre Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary ecological decline in the terrestrial realm correlated with the onset of Deccan volcanism and records of global climate change ~400 ka prior to the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary.Incorporating ~200 new analyses, we also provide a new pooled age for the IrZ tephra of 66.052 0.008/0.043 Ma, which we interpret as the most reliable age for the CretaceousPaleogene boundary available. 
__label__SUPPORT  A 200-year record of gale frequency, Edinburgh, Scotland: possible link with high-magnitude volcanic eruptions  Abstract: Most research concerned with the relationship between volcanic activity and global climate change has focused on the impacts that volcanoes have on atmospheric temperature. Very little attention, however, has been given to the effect of volcanic eruptions on patterns of storminess. Here we present a historical record of gale-day frequency for Edinburgh, Scotland, extending from AD 1780 to 1988 (the Mossman-Hickey chronology), which we believe represents the longest historical record of gales in Europe. Calculation of galeday frequency for this time interval shows three clear peaks in storminess that follow the volcanic eruptions of Tambora (1815), Krakatoa (1883) and El Chichon (1982). It appears that the greatest periods of storminess evident in the Edinburgh record during the last 200 years have taken place during relatively short intervals following major episodes of volcanism. If correct, the processes linking high-magnitude volcanic eruptions to storminess in the North Atlantic need to be included in IPCC research that presently focuses most attention on linkages between increased storminess and the effects of global warming. 
__label__SUPPORT  Possible correlation of Oligocene climate changes with Ethiopian Oligocene ignimbrite eruptions  Abstract: The Oligocene Ethiopian continental flood basalt province (ca. 2931 Ma) contains significant silicic pyroclastic rocks (>60,000 km constituting up to 20% of the volcanic stratigraphy). Rhyolitic tephras, synchronous with the Ethiopian silicic pyroclastic rocks, are found in Indian Ocean ODP holes 711A. They are geochemically akin to the Ethiopian silicic pyroclastic rocks. This suggests that the Indian Ocean tephras originated from Ethiopian silicic eruptions and represents more distal fallout of this volcanism. The temporal coincidence of the Ethiopian flood volcanism with the Oligocene global cooling event (Oi2 30.3 Ma) and the emplacement of the Ethiopian silicic pyroclastic eruptions on a near-global scale strongly suggest that the Ethiopian continental flood basalt province may have contributed or at least accelerated the climate change that was already underway. 
__label__SUPPORT  Evaluating the link between the sulfur-rich Laacher See volcanic eruption and the Younger Dryas climate anomaly  Abstract: The Younger Dryas is considered the archetypal millennial-scale climate change event, and identifying its cause is fundamental for thoroughly understanding climate systematics during deglaciations. However, the mechanisms responsible for its initiation remain elusive, and both of the most researched triggers (a meltwater pulse or a bolide impact) are controversial. Here, we consider the problem from a different perspective and explore a hypothesis that Younger Dryas climate shifts were catalysed by the unusually sulfurrich 12.880 0.040 ka BP eruption of the Laacher See volcano (Germany). We use the most recent chronology for the GISP2 ice core ion dataset from the Greenland ice sheet to identify a large volcanic sulfur spike coincident with both the Laacher See eruption and the onset of Younger Dryasrelated cooling in Greenland (i.e. the most recent abrupt Greenland millennial-scale cooling event, the Greenland Stadial 1, GS-1). Previously published lake sediment and stalagmite records confirm that the eruptions timing was indistinguishable from the onset of cooling across the North Atlantic but that it preceded westerly wind repositioning over central Europe by 200 years. We suggest that the initial short-lived volcanic sulfate aerosol cooling was amplified by ocean circulation shifts and/or sea ice expansion, gradually cooling the North Atlantic region and incrementally shifting the midlatitude westerlies to the south. The aerosol-related cooling probably only lasted 13 years, and the majority of Younger Dryas-related cooling may have been due to the seaiceocean circulation positive feedback, which was particularly effective during the intermediate ice volume conditions characteristic of 13 ka BP. We conclude that the large and sulfur-rich Laacher See eruption should be considered a viable trigger for the Younger Dryas. However, future studies should prioritise climate modelling of high-latitude volcanism during deglacial boundary conditions in order to test the hypothesis proposed here. 4 Conclusions: We propose that the unusually sulfur-rich 12.880 0.040 ka BP Laacher See volcanic eruption initiated GS-1 cooling and the atmospheric reorganisation associated with the YD event. Recent revisions to the chronological framework of key European climate archives now strongly suggest that the onset of GS-1-related North Atlantic cooling occurred simultaneously with the LSE. We have identified a large volcanic sulfur spike within the GISP2 ion data (Zielinski et al., 1997) on the recent GICC05modelext chronology that coincides with both the onset of GS-1 cooling as recorded within the same ice core and the date of the LSE. Lipid biomarker hydrogen isotope ratios from Meerfelder Maar further corroborate that GS-1 atmospheric cooling began at 12.880 ka BP, coincident with the Laacher See Tephra within the same sediment but preceding the larger dynamical atmospheric response associated with the YD in central Europe by 170 years (Rach et al., 2014). Aerosol-induced cooling immediately following the eruption may have caused a positive feedback involving sea ice expansion and/or AMOC weakening, as previously proposed for other Greenland stadials over the interval 3080 ka BP (Baldini et al., 2015a), the 6th century AD (Buntgen et al., 2016), the Little Ice Age (Zhong et al., 2011; Miller et al., 2012), and the Holocene in general (Kobashi et al., 2017). Viewed from this perspective, the YD was simply the latest, and last, manifestation of a last glacial stadial.The strongly asymmetric nature of the sulfate aerosol veil released by the LSE cooled the Northern Hemisphere preferentially, inducing a strong hemispheric temperature asymmetry and potentially triggering a cascade of dynamical climate shifts across both hemispheres, including a southward-shifted ITCZ and Hadley cells. Intermediate ice volume conditions around 13 ka BP, driven by rising insolation during the Last Glacial termination, may have promoted a positive feedback following the LSEs injection of between 6.76 and 104.8 Mt of SO2 into the stratosphere (Textor et al., 2003). This is also consistent with observations that YD-type events were not unique to the last deglaciation but existed during older deglaciations as well (Broecker et al., 2010). At least one high-latitude M6 eruption likely occurred during most deglacial intervals, and therefore GS-1 and earlier YD-type events may simply reflect the convergence of large, sulfaterich high-latitude NH eruptions with intermediate ice volume conditions. NH continental ice sheet decay induced continental lithospheric unloading and may have triggered highlatitude NH volcanism (Zielinski et al., 1997; Sternai et al., 2016), highlighting the intriguing possibility that eruptions such as the LSE were not randomly distributed geographically and temporally but instead were intrinsically linked to deglaciation. This perspective is strongly supported by a previous observation that the three largest eruptions (including the LSE) in the East Eifel Volcanic Field (Germany) were all associated with warming during glacial terminations and the reduction in ice mass in northern Europe (Nowell et al., 2006).The hypothesis that the Laacher See eruption triggered the YD is testable. Detailed tephrochronological studies of the ice containing the sulfate spike identified here could confirm the source of the sulfate, and, if it is confirmed as the LSE rather than a smaller Icelandic eruption, this would provide an important step towards attributing GS-1 and the YD to volcanic forcing (although evidence of GS-1 cooling already seems to occur immediately above the LST in central Europe). Similarly, volcanic sulfate triple isotope ratios of sulfur and oxygen provide information regarding the residence time of volcanic plumes in the stratosphere. The majority of atmospheric processes encourage mass-dependent fractionation; however, rare mass-independent fractionation processes produce isotope ratios that do not behave according to predictions based on mass-dependent processes (Martin et al., 2014). Historical volcanic eruptions where sulfate aerosols reached the stratosphere have been successfully identified in ice cores (Baroni et al., 2008; Savarino et al., 2003), indicating that the technique is effective at distinguishing large explosive eruptions from smaller local ones. This technique could also determine if the sulfate in the potential LSE sulfate spike reached the stratosphere. Although this would not necessarily confirm the LSE as the source, it would strongly suggest that the sulfate was derived from a climatologically significant eruption rather than a smaller Icelandic one. Most importantly, more climate modelling studies of high-latitude, large, and sulfur-rich eruptions under deglacial boundary conditions are needed to constrain the climate effects of volcanism during deglaciation. The role of halogen emissions are particularly understudied, and modelling efforts should also quantify their effects on climate.Clim. Past, 14, 969990, 2018 www.clim-past.net/14/969/2018/Finally, accurate dating of other large volcanic eruptions during intermediate ice volume conditions is key to testing the link between volcanism and other Greenland stadials; this information could eventually also support, or refute, the LSEs role in triggering the YD.More research is clearly necessary to better characterise the sensitivity of Last Glacial climate to volcanic eruption latitude, sulfur content, and magnitude. Due to perceived chronological mismatches, the concept that the YD was triggered by the LSE is vastly understudied compared to both the Younger Dryas Impact Hypothesis and the meltwater forcing hypothesis. However, the concept that the LSE triggered the YD has clear advantages compared to other hypotheses: (i) there is no disagreement that the eruption occurred, (ii) available evidence suggests that the eruption occurred synchronously with the initiation of YD cooling, (iii) a volcanic trigger is consistent with the relatively high frequency of similar, and often more severe, cooling events during intermediate ice volume conditions, (iv) volcanic aerosol cooling followed by a prolonged positive feedback has been implicated in other cooling events, and (v) events similar to the YD occurred over other deglaciations, supporting a relatively commonplace trigger such as volcanism. Future research may well demonstrate that the Laacher See eruption did not play any role in catalysing the YD, but the coincidence of a large, high-latitude, and anomalously sulfur-rich eruption with the initiation of YD-related cooling merits serious further consideration.Data availability. The previously published datasets used here are available from the source publications, from the original authors, or from open access databases (NOAAs National Climatic Data Center, PANGAEA, etc.).Competing interests. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Acknowledgements. We thank two anonymous reviewers and David Pyle, Xu Zhang, Alan Condron, and Evzen Stuchlik for constructive comments that greatly improved the manuscript. We also thank David Thornalley for his editorial handling and suggestions, which also helped improved the manuscript. Early versions of the manuscript benefitted from critical comments by Bob Hilton, Erin McClymont, and Lisa Baldini. Ed Llewellin is thanked for comments that helped finalise the manuscript. We also thank Dirk Sachse for useful discussions and Paul Mayewski for providing the GISP2 ion datasets.Edited by: David Thornalley Reviewed by: Alan Condron, Xu Zhang, David Pyle, and two anonymous referees 
__label__SUPPORT  Thermal erosion of cratonic lithosphere as a potential trigger for mass-extinction  Abstract: The temporal coincidence between large igneous provinces (LIPs) and mass extinctions has led many to pose a causal relationship between the two. However, there is still no consensus on a mechanistic model that explains how magmatism leads to the turnover of terrestrial and marine plants, invertebrates and vertebrates. Here we present a synthesis of ammonite biostratigraphy, isotopic data and high precision U-Pb zircon dates from the Triassic-Jurassic (T-J) and Pliensbachian-Toarcian (Pl-To) boundaries demonstrating that these biotic crises are both associated with rapid change from an initial cool period to greenhouse conditions. We explain these transitions as a result of changing gas species emitted during the progressive thermal erosion of cratonic lithosphere by plume activity or internal heating of the lithosphere. Our petrological model for LIP magmatism argues that initial gas emission was dominated by sulfur liberated from sulfide-bearing cratonic lithosphere before CO2 became the dominant gas. This model offers an explanation of why LIPs erupted through oceanic lithosphere are not associated with climatic and biotic crises comparable to LIPs emitted through cratonic lithosphere. 
__label__SUPPORT  A detection of Milankovitch frequencies in global volcanic activity  Abstract: A rigorous detection of Milankovitch periodicities in volcanic output across the PleistoceneHolocene ice age has remained elusive. We report on a spectral analysis of a large number of well-preserved ash plume deposits recorded in marine sediments along the Pacifi c Ring of Fire. Our analysis yields a statistically signifi cant detection of a spectral peak at the obliquity period. We propose that this variability in volcanic activity results from crustal stress changes associated with ice age mass redistribution. In particular, increased volcanism lags behind the highest rate of increasing eustatic sea level (decreasing global ice volume) by 4.0 3.6 k.y. and correlates with numerical predictions of stress changes at volcanically active sites. These results support the presence of a causal link between variations in ice age climate, continental stress fi eld, and volcanism. GEOLOGY, February 2013; v. 41; no. 2; p. 227230; Data Repository item 2013055 | doi:10.1130/G33419.1 | Published online 30 November 2012 2012 eological Society of America. For permission to copy, contact Copyright Permissions, GSA, or editing@geosociety.org. 1GSA Data Repository item 2013055, data, additional fi gures explaining the methods, and an extended error analysis of the data set and statistics, is available online at www.geosociety.org/pubs/ft2013.htm, or on request from editing@geosociety.org or Documents Secretary, GSA, P.O. Box 9140, Boulder, CO 80301, USA. Bering Sea Gulf of Alaska Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Asia North America CONCLUSION: We have reported on the fi rst Pacifi c-wide detection of obliquity-forced variability in late Pleistocene records of volcanic eruptions identifi ed using a large number of well-preserved tephra layers in widely distributed marine sedimentary cores. The detection confi rms a connection between variations in climate and volcanism during this time period. We suggest that this connection is mediated by changes in surface mass loading and the associated isostatic adjustment of the solid Earth. This loading mechanism is supported by an observed phase relationship, wherein increased volcanism slightly lags behind glacial unloading at the 41 k.y.Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gsa/geology/article-pdf/41/2/227/3715949/227.pdf by University of Arizona user on 21 February 2019230 www.gsapubs.org | February 2013 | GEOLOGYobliquity band, as well as a model analysis of changes in normal stress. Our numerical predictions of ice-age-induced stress changes suggest that future efforts to correlate such changes with eruption frequency should take into account the geographic variability in the ice-age stress fi eld. Further development of tephra time series, to include greater age control, longer time spans, and more-detailed spatial coverage, would also help to better characterize the nature of the coupling between climate and volcanism. 
__label__SUPPORT  Volcanic stratospheric sulfur injections and aerosol optical depth from 500 BCE to 1900 CE  Abstract: The injection of sulfur into the stratosphere by explosive volcanic eruptions is the cause of significant climate variability. Based on sulfate records from a suite of ice cores from Greenland and Antarctica, the eVolv2k database includes estimates of the magnitudes and approximate source latitudes of major volcanic stratospheric sulfur injection (VSSI) events from 500 BCE to 1900 CE, constituting an update of prior reconstructions and an extension of the record by 1000 years. The database incorporates improvements to the ice core records (in terms of synchronisation and dating) and refinements to the methods used to estimate VSSI from ice core records, and it includes first estimates of the random uncertainties in VSSI values. VSSI estimates for many of the largest eruptions, including Samalas (1257), Tambora (1815), and Laki (1783), are within 10 % of prior estimates. A number of strong events are included in eVolv2k which are largely underestimated or not included in earlier VSSI reconstructions, including events in 540, 574, 682, and 1108 CE. The long-term annual mean VSSI from major volcanic eruptions is estimated to be 0.5 Tg [S]yr1, 50 % greater than a prior reconstruction due to the identification of more events and an increase in the magnitude of many intermediate events. A long-term latitudinally and monthly resolved stratospheric aerosol optical depth (SAOD) time series is reconstructed from the eVolv2k VSSI estimates, and the resulting global mean SAOD is found to be similar (within 33 %) to a prior reconstruction for most of the largest eruptions. The long-term (500 BCE1900 CE) average global mean SAOD estimated from the eVolv2k VSSI estimates including a constant background injection of stratospheric sulfur is 0.014, 30 % greater than a prior reconstruction. These new long-term reconstructions of past VSSI and SAOD variability give context to recent volcanic forcing, suggesting that the 20th century was a period of somewhat weaker than average volcanic forcing, with current best estimates of 20th century mean VSSI and SAOD values being 25 and 14 % less, respectively, than the mean of the 500 BCE to 1900 CE period. The reconstructed VSSI and SAOD data are available at https://doi.org/10.1594/WDCC/eVolv2k_v2. 5 Conclusions and discussion: This paper presents a new reconstruction of the climatic influence of major volcanic eruptions over the time span from 500 BCE to 1900 CE. The eVolv2k reconstructions of volcanic VSSI and SAOD presented here represent, first and foremost, the results of improved dating, resolution, and synchronisation of ice core sulfate records from Antarctica and Greenland (Sigl et al., 2014, 2015). Given the improvements in methodologies used to date and synchronise ice core records including automated synchronising and absolute dating through the matching of signatures of cosmogenic isotopes in ice cores and tree rings in the eighth century (Sigl et al., 2015) the eVolv2k reconstruction can be confidently assumed to be a more accurate estimate of volcanic forcing compared to prior reconstructions, particularly for time periods before 1250 CE. This assertion is supported by strong correlation between the newly compiled volcanic ice core records and instances of sudden large-scale cooling from dendrochronological climate reconstructions (Sigl et al., 2015).The eVolv2k reconstruction provides the input data for climate model simulations which aim to include external climate forcing agents as far back in time as 500 BCE. Volcanic stratospheric sulfur injection (VSSI) estimates can be directly ingested by suitable aerosol climate models. Alternatively, the EVA forcing generator (Toohey et al., 2016b) can be used to produce stratospheric aerosol optical properties,Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 809831, 2017 www.earth-syst-sci-data.net/9/809/2017/including the stratospheric aerosol optical depth (SAOD) based on the VSSI record. Aerosol optical properties can then be used as boundary conditions for model simulations. The eVolv2k reconstruction is the recommended volcanic forcing for transient simulations within the Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project (PMIP; Jungclaus et al., 2016) and therefore represents an update to the reconstructions most often used in prior palaeo-simulations, including the IVI2 (Gao et al., 2008) and ICI (Crowley and Unterman, 2013) forcing datasets.The eVolv2k VSSI estimates and the related SAOD perturbations produced via the EVA forcing generator show broad agreement with the IVI2 and ICI reconstructions over the 12501900 period in terms of the magnitudes of the largest volcanic events. For VSSI, agreement between eVolv2k and IVI2 is the product of compensatory differences, including generally smaller ice core flux estimates and a larger effective transfer function used to scale ice core sulfate fluxes into VSSI estimates. For the SAOD reconstructions, agreement between the EVA(eVolv2k) and ICI reconstructions reflects relative consistency in the ice core composites (after 1250) constructed in both efforts and a related methodology, wherein observations following the 1991 Pinatubo eruption are used to define the scaling from ice core sulfate to SAOD. Before 1250 CE, the eVolv2k VSSI and SAOD reconstructions include a number of events which are comparatively underestimated or completely missing in prior reconstructions. These updated estimates promise improvements in the attribution of forced and unforced climate variability before 1250 CE.In general, estimates of long-term mean VSSI and SAOD in eVolv2k are larger than prior reconstructions. For VSSI, this reflects an increase in the number of identified events and an increase in the estimated magnitude for a number of moderate to strong events. The relative increase in long-term mean SAOD compared to prior work is primarily due to the inclusion of a non-zero minimum (or background) SAOD, which is consistent with the minimum in stratospheric SAOD observed by satellite sensors around the year 2000 CE. The long-term estimates of VSSI and SAOD evolution give context to the best current estimates of 20th century volcanic forcing. An independent estimate of 20th century mean VSSI is about 25 % smaller than the long-term eVolv2k mean. Assuming stationarity of global eruption frequencies, it is therefore more likely than not that the 21st century mean volcanic forcing will be greater than that of the 20th century.For the first time, the eVolv2k reconstruction provides estimates of the uncertainty in volcanic VSSI estimates based on estimated uncertainty in the ice core sulfate composites and the error inherent in using ice sheet average fluxes as a proxy for the full hemispheric sulfate deposition (and therefore the hemispheric atmospheric sulfate loading). These error estimates depend on the number of ice cores used in the composite and the degree of variation seen between the ice cores. For most of the largest volcanic events, the estimated uncertaintyis around 2030 %, while for smaller events the estimated error reaches values of > 50 %. Systematic errors are also significant, representing the possibility that VSSI or SAOD estimates are biased in the long-term average. The construction of transfer functions from the NWT of the 1950s and 1960s and from the single data point of the 1991 Pinatubo eruption carries significant uncertainties regarding the injection magnitudes and injection heights. Observational estimates of the VSSI of Pinatubo have uncertainties of 20 % (Guo et al., 2004), and recent modelling studies have argued for a VSSI from Pinatubo half that of the usual estimates (e.g. Dhomse et al., 2014). An important uncertainty in the reconstruction of volcanic forcing stems from the inability to differentiate between ice core sulfate from vast, stratospheric sulfate clouds and that from relatively local effusive eruptions. Icelandic eruptions with large effusive emissions, like Laki or the 20142015 Holuhraun eruption (Schmidt et al., 2015), could theoretically lead to large sulfate fluxes to the Greenland ice sheets with little to no significant stratospheric injection. VSSI and SAOD estimates then based on the raw Greenland sulfate records would produce large overestimates of the global effects of the eruptions. This issue led Crowley and Unterman (2013) to mute the impact of Greenland sulfate fluxes for signals that could be attributed to Icelandic eruptions in the ICI reconstruction. On the other hand, the vertical distribution of the sulfur emissions by Laki are still under debate (Lanciki et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2012), and while it seems likely that the Greenland sulfate signal for Laki does contain some component related to tropospheric emissions, the proportion of tropospheric to stratospheric injections is very unclear. For these reasons, we have not implemented a correction to the VSSI estimates of Laki or other known or suspected Icelandic eruptions. Uncertainties in the scaling procedures used within the EVA forcing generator certainly add another level of uncertainty to the SAOD estimates: for example, uncertainty in the measured SAOD after Pinatubo translates directly into systematic uncertainty in the SAOD estimated by EVA.Future work should be able to further refine the estimates of VSSI and SAOD presented here. First, a larger network of high-quality ice core sulfate records from Greenland should reduce random errors in the composite flux due to limited sampling. Reducing uncertainty in the transfer functions used to link atmospheric sulfate content and ice core sulfate fluxes would greatly improve estimates of volcanic forcing. Studies with atmospheric models show some promise (Gao et al., 2007; Toohey et al., 2013; Marshall et al., 2017), but inter-model differences in stratospheric sulfate evolution highlight substantial uncertainties in the physical processes controlling aerosol growth and transport (Zanchettin et al., 2016). Emerging techniques to differentiate sulfur from tropospheric vs. stratospheric origin (e.g. Lanciki et al., 2012) offer potential strategies for reducing uncertainties in future volcanic forcing reconstructions. Finally, the continued extension of ice core volcanic records to thewww.earth-syst-sci-data.net/9/809/2017/ Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 809831, 2017present should soon provide important information, since anthropogenic sulfate flux over Greenland contaminated over much of the 20th century by anthropogenic sulfur emissions has now almost reached pre-industrial levels, allowing for the detection of moderate volcanic eruptions in Greenland.Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 809831, 2017 www.earth-syst-sci-data.net/9/809/2017/ 
__label__SUPPORT  Calcium and calcium isotope changes during carbon cycle perturbations at the endPermian  Abstract: Negative carbon and calcium isotope excursions, as well as climate shifts, took place during the most severe mass extinction event in Earths history, the end-Permian (252 Ma). Investigating the connection between carbon and calcium cycles during transient carbon cycle perturbation events, such as the end-Permian, may help resolve the intricacies between the coupled calcium-carbon cycles, as well as provide a tool for constraining the causes of mass extinction. Here we identify the deficiencies of a simplified calcium model employed in several previous studies, and we demonstrate the importance of a fully coupled carbon cycle model when investigating the dynamics of carbon and calcium cycling. Simulations with a modified version of the Long-term Ocean-atmosphere-Sediment CArbon cycle Reservoir model, which includes a fully coupled carbon-calcium cycle, indicate that increased weathering rates and ocean acidification (potentially caused by Siberian Trap volcanism) are not capable of producing trends observed in the record, as previously claimed. Our model results suggest that combined effects of carbon input via Siberian Trap volcanism (12,000 Pg C), the cessation of biological carbon export, and variable calcium isotope fractionation (due to a change in the seawater carbonate ion concentration) represents a more plausible scenario. This scenario successfully reconciles 13C and 44Ca trends observed in the sediment record, as well as the proposed warming of >6C. 7. Conclusions: Several previous studies have employed a simple calcium-only model (following Payne et al. [2010]) with the attempt to resolve the dynamics and links between carbon and calcium cycles as well as the cause of the mass extinction during the end-Permian [Payne et al., 2010; Hinojosa et al., 2012] and more recently during the Toarcian oceanic anoxic event (Early Jurassic) [Brazier et al., 2015]. Here we have identified the deficiencies in such a simplified approach and showed the importance of a fully coupled calcium-carbon cycle model.The modeling framework presented here successfully reconciles the end-Permian trends in 13C and 44Ca recorded in carbonate sediments. The model also predicts a 50 kyr rise in atmospheric CO2 causing a global temperature increase of more than 6C. Our model results suggest that the end-Permian mass extinction and the perturbation in carbon-calcium cycling was due to a combination of several factors, including introduction of about 12,000 Pg of carbon through Siberian Trap volcanism, the collapse of ocean primary productivity, and a variable calcium isotope fractionation between seawater and buried carbonates during inorganic precipitation due to changing [CO23 ]. Most importantly, accelerated weathering rates alone that arise due to the perturbation in the carbon cycle are most likely insufficient to directly produce a significant impact on the calcium cycle, contrary to the claims of previous studies. 
__label__SUPPORT  Hydrothermal venting of greenhouse gases triggering Early Jurassic global warming  Abstract: The climate change in the Toarcian (Early Jurassic) was characterized by a major perturbation of the global carbon cycle. The event lasted for approximately 200,000 years and was manifested by a global warming of 6 C, anoxic conditions in the oceans, and extinction of marine species. The triggering mechanisms for the perturbation and environmental change are however strongly debated. Here, we present evidence for a rapid formation and transport of greenhouse gases from the deep sedimentary reservoirs in the Karoo Basin, South Africa. Magmatic sills were emplaced during the initial stages of formation of the Early Jurassic Karoo Large Igneous Province, and had a profound influence on the fate of light elements in the organic-rich sedimentary host rocks. Total organic carbon contents and vitrinite reflectivity data from contact aureoles around the sills show that organic carbon was lost from the country rocks during heating. We present data from a new type of geological structures, termed breccia pipes, rooted in the aureoles within the shale of the Western Karoo Basin. The breccia pipes are cylindrical structures up to 150 meters in diameter and are mainly comprised of brecciated and baked black shale. Thousands of breccia pipes were formed due to gas pressure build-up during metamorphism of the shales, resulting in venting of greenhouse gases to the Toarcian atmosphere. Mass balance calculations constrained by new aureole data show that up to 1800 Gt of CO2 was formed from organic material in the western Karoo Basin. About 15 times this amount of CO2 (27,400 Gt) may have formed in the entire basin during the intrusive event. UPb dating of zircons from a sill related to many of the pipes demonstrates that the magma was emplaced 182.50.4 million years ago. This supports a causal relationship between the intrusive volcanism, the gas venting, and the Toarcian global warming. 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 6. Conclusions: The new geological, geochemical and geochronology data represent evidence for large scale carbon gas venting in the Early Jurassic. It is likely that the many thousands of breccia pipes formed within the 200,000 yr time span of the Toarcian global warming. Our data show that nearly 2000 Gt CO2 could have been produced from the Ecca Group in the western Karoo Basin. This is a conservative estimate considering the total area with sill intrusions in organic rich shale, which has a production potential of at least 27,400 Gt CO2. The venting from the Karoo Basin could consequently have acted as the main trigger for the Toarcian carbon cycle perturbation. The Toarcian greenhouse would have been further accelerated by the metamorphism of coal deposits in Antarctica, long term lava degassing from the KarooFerrar province, astronomical climate forcing [3], and by feedback mechanisms such as melting of gas hydrates [2,4].Our new data clearly tie the Toarcian carbon cycle perturbation to the Karoo LIP and the volcanic Karoo Basin. Our hypothesis highlights the importance of the emplacement environment of LIPs in causing global environmental climate changes. Ultimately, an understanding of the triggering mechanism and consequences of previous climatic changes driven by carbon gas emissions is highly relevant for predicting the consequences of current anthropogenic carbon emissions, as these events are likely of similar magnitude and duration. 
__label__SUPPORT  A volcanic trigger for the Late Ordovician mass extinction? Mercury data from south China and Laurentia  Abstract: The Late Ordovician mass extinction (LOME), one of the five largest Phanerozoic biodiversity depletions, occurred in two pulses associated with the expansion and contraction of ice sheets on Gondwana during the Hirnantian Age. It is widely recognized that environmental disruptions associated with changing glacial conditions contributed to the extinctions, but neither the kill mechanisms nor the causes of glacial expansion are well understood. Here we report anomalously high Hg concentrations in marine strata from south China and Laurentia deposited immediately before, during, and after the Hirnantian glacial maximum that we interpret to reflect the emplacement of a large igneous province (LIP). An initial Hg enrichment occurs in the late Katian Age, while a second enrichment occurs immediately below the Katian-Hirnantian boundary, which marks the first pulse of extinction. Further Hg enrichment occurs in strata deposited during glacioeustatic sea-level fall and the glacial maximum. We propose that these Hg enrichments are products of multiple phases of LIP volcanism. While elevated Hg concentrations have been linked to LIP emplacement coincident with other Phanerozoic mass extinctions, the climate response during the LOME may have been unique owing to different climatic boundary conditions, including preexisting ice sheets. Our observations support a volcanic trigger for the LOME and further point to LIP volcanism as a primary driver of environmental changes that caused mass extinctions. INTRODUCTION Paleoclimate records indicate global cooling during ~35 m.y. of the Early and Middle Ordovician, a relatively stable climate in the ~8-m.y.long Katian Age, and a glacial maximum in the Hirnantian Age (445.2 443.8 Ma) (Trotter et al., 2008; Finnegan et al., 2011; Melchin et al., 2013). Cooling likely resulted in the establishment of ice sheets on polar Gondwana in the Katian Age or even earlier (Saltzman and Young, 2005; Finnegan et al., 2011; Pohl et al., 2016). The subsequent rapid expansion of Hirnantian ice sheets resulted in glacioeustatic sea-level fall and decreased temperatures (Finnegan et al., 2011) associated with the first pulse of the Late Ordovician mass extinction (LOME) (Melchin et al., 2013). The second pulse of the LOME occurred as glaciers melted, oceans warmed, and anoxic seawater transgressed the shelves (Melchin et al., 2013). The cause of the glacial advance is unknown, but has been attributed to CO2 levels falling below a critical threshold (Herrmann et al., 2004). Lefebvre et al. (2010) used a coupled biogeochemical-energy balance model to demonstrate that chemical weathering of a hypothetical late Katian large igneous province (LIP) could have lowered CO2 over millions of years to cause major ice sheet growth. However, geological and geochemical evidence of such an eruption are currently lacking, and it is unclear if the apparent rapid time scale of the Hirnantian glacial advance is consistent with a weathering mechanism. Phanerozoic mass extinctions have been linked geochronologically and mechanistically to the emplacement of LIPs (Courtillot and Renne, 2003; Bond and Wignall, 2014). CO2 release associated with LIP emplacement can produce greenhouse warming, ocean acidification, and marine anoxia (Self et al., 2014), and SO2 release can induce short-term cooling through the production of stratospheric sulfur aerosols (Schmidt et al., 2015). Volcanism is the major preanthropogenic source of mercury to Earths surface environments (Selin, 2009), and the accumulation of Hg in sediment can be used as a proxy for ancient volcanic events (Sanei et al., 2012; Font et al., 2016; Thibodeau et al., 2016). The atmospheric residence time of Hg is long (~12 yr) (Selin, 2009) relative to atmospheric mixing time, and volcanogenic Hg can accumulate globally (Schuster et al., 2002). Because Hg binds to organic matter in marine settings, Hg concentration per unit of total organic carbon (TOC) is a useful measure of environmental Hg loading in modern (Fitzgerald et al., 2007) and ancient (Sanei et al., 2012) environments. Hg and Hg/TOC enrichments are observed in marine strata deposited during Phanerozoic mass extinctions associated with known LIPs, including the Siberian Traps at the Permian-Triassic boundary (Sanei et al., 2012), the Central Atlantic magmatic province at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary (Thibodeau et al., 2016), and the Deccan Traps at the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary (Font et al., 2016). GEOLOGIC SETTING AND METHODS In order to develop records of Hg loading associated with the LOME, we analyzed samples from successions in south China and Laurentia spanning the interval of the LOME and Hirnantian glacial maximum (Fig. 1). GEOLOGY, July 2017; v. 45; no. 7; p. 631634 | Data Repository item 2017205 | doi:10.1130/G38940.1 | Published online 01 May 2017 2017 The Authors. Gold Open Access: This paper is published under the terms of the CC-BY license. Laurentia South China CONCLUSION: We document three Hg enrichments associated with the LOME and suggest that they are markers of LIP volcanism. While specific mechanisms linking LIP volcanism to the LOME and Hirnantian glacial maximum are speculative until direct geological and geochronological evidence of a late KatianHirnantian LIP is found, the stratigraphic position of the oldest of the Hg anomalies is consistent with modeling predictions linking the chemical weathering of a Katian LIP to Late Ordovician cooling. If the Hg enrichments just preceding the Katian-Hirnantian boundary and through the Hirnantian glacial maximum represent further LIP activity, the synchronous volcanism and glacial expansion may be reconcilable through the albedo effects of volcanic sulfate aerosols. If confirmed, the LIP inferred from our Hg data would join those associated with mass extinction events throughout the Phanerozoic and strengthen the case for LIP volcanism as a primary driver of the environmental changes that caused mass extinction of life on Earth.Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gsa/geology/article-pdf/45/7/631/998935/631.pdf by University of Arizona user on 20 February 2019634 www.gsapubs.org | Volume 45 | Number 7 | GEOLOGY 
__label__SUPPORT  Eighthundred years of summer temperature variations in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula reconstructed from tree rings  Abstract: warmer than the preceding centuries, does not show unprecedented warmth in the last 800 years. Three ensembles of climate simulations conducted with two global atmosphere ocean general circulation climate models (GCMs), considering different external forcings, were used for comparison: ECHO-G (Erik) and MPI-ESM (E1 and E2). Additionally, individual simulations were available from GCM included in the fifth Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, as well as single-forcing simulations performed with MPI-ESM. The comparison of the reconstructed and simulated temperatures revealed a close agreement of NCZTjaso with the simulations performed with total solar irradiance forcing with wider amplitude. Furthermore, the correlations with single-forcing simulations suggest volcanism as the main factor controlling preindustrial summer temperature variations in the Cazorla Range over the last five centuries. The persistent anti-correlation between NCZTjaso and simulated temperatures during the MCALIA transitional period underlines the current Abstract July-to-October temperature variations are reconstructed for the last 800 years based on tree-ring widths from the Cazorla Range. Annual tree-ring width at this site has been found to be negatively correlated with temperature of the previous summer. This relationship is genuine, metabolically plausible, and cannot be explained as an indirect correlation mediated by hydroclimate. The resulting reconstruction (NCZTjaso) represents the southernmost annually resolved temperature record based on tree-rings in Europe and provides detailed information on the regional climate evolution during the Late Holocene in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula. The tree-ring based temperature reconstruction of Cazorla Range reveals predominantly warm summer temperatures during the transition between the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA) and the Little Ice Age (LIA) from the 13th to the mid of the sixteenth century. The LIA spanned a slightly longer time (15001930 CE) than in other European summer temperature reconstructions from the Alps and Pyrenees. The twentieth century, though 
__label__NEGATE __label__SUPPORT  Volcanic and Solar Forcing of Climate Change during the Preindustrial Era  Abstract: The climate response to variability in volcanic aerosols and solar irradiance, the primary forcings during the preindustrial era, is examined in a stratosphere-resolving general circulation model. The best agreement with historical and proxy data is obtained using both forcings, each of which has a significant effect on global mean temperatures. However, their regional climate impacts in the Northern Hemisphere are quite different. While the short-term continental winter warming response to volcanism is well known, it is shown that due to opposing dynamical and radiative effects, the long-term (decadal mean) regional response is not significant compared to unforced variability for either the winter or the annual average. In contrast, the long-term regional response to solar forcing greatly exceeds unforced variability for both time averages, as the dynamical and radiative effects reinforce one another, and produces climate anomalies similar to those seen during the Little Ice Age. Thus, long-term regional changes during the preindustrial appear to have been dominated by solar forcing. 6. Conclusions: Volcanic forcing is important for both regional climate change on a year-to-year basis, and for long-term climate change on a global scale. It appears unlikely to induce sustained regional climate changes that exceed unforced variability, however. In contrast, solar forcing creates long-term regional climate changes that are greater than unforced variability, and which resemble those seen in proxy-based reconstructions of historical temperature change during the Maunder Minimum. The regional anomalies result primarily from a forced shift in the AO.During the last several decades, there has been an apparent upward trend in the AO (Thompson and Wallace 1998). Solar forcing, however, has increased little if at all over this period, by less than 0.05 W m22 since the 1960s (the exact value depends upon the particular years chosen for the trend calculations). Such a small increase in irradiance would cause an AO enhancement of about 0.1 mb, much smaller than the apparent trend of 3 mb, which is more likely to be attributable to increases in greenhouse gases, and to a lesser extent, Arctic ozone depletion (Shindell et al. 2001b).Downward shifts in the AO are closely correlated with cold temperature extremes in Europe (Higgins et al. 2002; Thompson and Wallace 2001), consistent with the historical impression that the LIA in Europe was punctuated by short periods of extreme cold exceeding that seen in the multidecadal averages of proxy data shown here (Pfister 1995). The global mean Little IceAge signal can therefore be attributed to both volcanic and solar forcing, but while volcanic forcing may have played a major role in global-scale cooling, the much larger regional changes and probable changes in the frequency of extreme cold events were likely driven primarily by solar variability.Acknowledgments. Modeling of chemistryclimate interactions and stratospheric dynamics at GISS is supported by NASAs Atmospheric Chemistry Modeling and Analysis Program, while climate modeling is funded by the NASA Climate Program Office. GAS and DTS were also supported by NSF Grant ATM-00-02267. We thank M. Sato for providing the aerosol data, Scott Rutherford for assistance with analysis of the surface temperature reconstruction, David Rind for discussion, and the three anonymous reviewers for their comments. 
__label__SUPPORT  Assessing the impact of large volcanic eruptions of the last millennium (8501850 CE) on Australian rainfall regimes  Abstract: Explosive volcanism is an important natural climate forcing, impacting global surface temperatures and regional precipitation. Although previous studies have investigated aspects of the impact of tropical volcanism on various oceanatmosphere systems and regional climate regimes, volcanic eruptions remain a poorly understood climate forcing and climatic responses are not well constrained. In this study, volcanic eruptions are explored in particular reference to Australian precipitation, and both the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) and El NinoSouthern Oscillation (ENSO). Using nine realisations of the last millennium (LM) (8501850 CE) with different time-evolving forcing combinations, from the NASA GISS ModelE2-R, the impact of the six largest tropical volcanic eruptions of this period are investigated. Overall, we find that volcanic aerosol forcing increased the likelihood of El Nino and positive IOD conditions for up to four years following an eruption, and resulted in positive precipitation anomalies over north-west (NW) and south-east (SE) Australia. Larger atmospheric sulfate loading during larger volcanic eruptions coincided with more persistent positive IOD and El Nino conditions, enhanced positive precipitation anomalies over NW Australia, and dampened precipitation anomalies over SE Australia. 4 Discussion and conclusions: Our results suggest that the large-scale IOD and ENSO systems, and Australian rainfall regimes, were all impacted by large tropical eruptions of the last millennium.The DMI response simulated in the GISS ensemble following large eruptions is complimentary to previous research conducted by Cheung and Abram (2016) and Maher et al. (2015). The pIOD peak in year 1 (Fig. 4) is consistent with both studies, in which statistically significant pIOD conditions occurred from 6 months to 2 years after an eruption. Cheung and Abram (2016) also found a statistically significant negative condition immediately after eruption at year 0, however this was absent from both Maher et al.s (2015) results and the CR forcing category in this study. The 2G category does show a nIOD condition at year 0, but this is not believed to be a response to volcanic forcing as a similar nIOD condition can be seen at year 1. The abrupt shift to a negative condition at year 5 was not found in either Cheung and Abram (2016) or Maher et al. (2015)s results. Both studies found a gradual decrease in DMI from year 1 to years 3 to 4.www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/ Clim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018The smooth transition to a lower DMI following eruptions found by Cheung and Abram (2016) and Maher et al. (2015) contrasts with the abrupt change from a pIOD of approximately 0.13 at year 4, to an nIOD of 0.069 in the CR ensembles and 0.083 in the 2G ensemble at year 5 (Fig. 4). This inconsistency between studies could be due to the selection of eruptions analysed by each paper. Cheung and Abram (2016) included all eruptions from 850 to 2005 CE recorded on the IVI2 (Gao et al., 2008) in their analysis. While this encompasses all eruptions analysed here, it also included many smaller eruptions that would likely have dampened the climatic response a response that has been analysed in previous papers (Zambri and Robock, 2016). Maher et al. (2015) looked at the five largest eruptions from 1880 to present, of which the largest was Pinatubo (1991), which measured at 30.10 Tg globally on the IVI2 (Gao et al., 2008). In comparison, our research deals with eruptions of much larger atmospheric loading, ranging from 56.59 to 257.91 Tg.Therefore, the persistence of a high pIOD through to year 4 seen here may result from the larger mean atmospheric sulfate loading imposed. This theory is supported by the comparison between the Samalas and Huaynaptina (Fig. 5) eruptions. Our results showed that while both eruptions caused asignificant pIOD at year 1, the larger 1258 Samalas eruption alone persisted with a significant pIOD condition in following years. Further support can be gathered from the comparison between the 2G and CR ensemble means in Fig. 4. Years 03 show more extreme values in the 2G ensemble mean, while years 46 show similar values for both forcing categories. Maher et al. (2015) found a similar response, with the two largest eruptions analysed in the paper showing the largest and longest enduring pIOD anomalies. This suggests that larger mean atmospheric sulfate loading can cause not only more persistent, but also more extreme pIOD conditions.The phase and intensity of the IOD is known to be influenced by the Asian monsoon (Brown et al., 2009; Xiang et al., 2011), which means that the physical mechanisms driving the pIOD response to volcanic forcing in GISS likely stem from this relationship. In GISS, the Asian monsoon was suppressed by the anomalous north-easterly flow off the south-east coast of China in years 0 and +1 (Figs. 13, 14) generated by volcanic aerosols, and a decrease of convection over the warm pool, cause by El Nino-like anomalies in those same years (Fig. 3). These feedbacks caused a comparatively warmer WIO, generating a pIOD. The AsianClim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018 www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/monsoon suppression following volcanic eruptions was also noted by Stevenson et al. (2016).The NINO3.4 response found in this research supports previous studies by Adams et al. (2003), Mann et al. (2005), Emile-Geay et al. (2008), McGregor et al. (2010) and Maher et al. (2015), despite GISS modelling weaker SST anomalies than observations (Fig. 1a, b). Figure 6 shows a very promi-nent and persistent El Nino response in all 6 years following eruption, however it lacks the weaker La Nina-like state that was observed 36 years after eruption in these previous papers. Spatial maps of SST (Fig. 3), while dominated by the overall volcanic cooling, show an El Nino-like pattern in the eastern Pacific that is most visible in year 4, possibly driven by the anomalous winds off the western coast of Southwww.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/ Clim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018America in year +3 (Fig. 13); however it is also distinctive in years 0, 1, and 3. We can therefore conclude that El Ninolike anomalies were generated in the multi-ensemble mean response in years 06 following eruption by a uniform reduction in surface temperature, driven by a decrease in the surface heat flux; a response which was also observed by Mann et al. (2005) and Emile-Geay et al. (2008). It can furthermore be concluded that the intensification of the El Nino in year +4 was due to anomalous wind flow in year +3. Comparison of the Samalas and Huaynaptina (Fig. 7) eruptions also suggest that, similar to the DMI, the intensity and endurance of the ENSO response to volcanic forcing increases with increasing mean atmospheric sulfate loading. This once again supports the findings of Maher et al. (2015) that identified a similar pattern.The positive response of Australian precipitation to volcanic forcing as seen here (Figs. 8, 9 and 11) is in agreement with several papers that identified a precipitation surplus over Australia following large volcanic eruptions (Schneider et al., 2009; Joseph and Zeng, 2011). Our results suggest thatthe direct effect of volcanic aerosols on precipitation overrode the impact of the IOD and ENSO on Australian precipitation in the years following large tropical volcanic eruptions. Northwestern Australia (Fig. 9) showed larger positive precipitation anomalies between years 0 and 2 than southeastern Australia (Fig. 11) in the CR ensemble mean, and in years 0 and 2 in the 2G ensemble mean. This could be due to the positive precipitation anomalies that can be generated by combined El Nino and pIOD events in the NW Australian region (Meyers et al., 2007; Pepler et al., 2014), which enhance the precipitation surplus caused by volcanic aerosols.The varying response of NW Australia to the Samalas and Huaynaptina eruptions (Fig. 10) also supports the enhancement of the volcanically induced precipitation surplus by combined El Nino and pIOD events. The Samalas eruption was followed by strong and enduring El Nino and pIOD conditions for up to 4 years post volcanism, and showed larger positive precipitation anomalies from years 0 to 3 than the Huaynaptina eruption, that was accompanied by smaller, shorter lived El Nino and pIOD conditions. The precipitationClim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018 www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/surplus related to the Samalas eruption in NW and SE Australia also peaked earlier than Huaynaptina, which could be a response to the larger atmospheric sulfate loading. Interestingly, previous papers have not reported a relationship between atmospheric sulfate loading and the peak in precipitation response (Robock and Lui, 1994; Iles et al., 2013, 2015).The precipitation anomalies of SE Australia (Fig. 12) further support this theory. The response to the Huaynaptina eruption, while peaking later than Samalas, endured longer, and with larger positive anomalies. The effect of strong, combined El Nino and pIOD conditions on SE Australia is significant precipitation deficits (Meyers et al., 2007; Pepler et al., 2014), which could explain the negative precipitation anomalies that occur in the Samalas response from year 2 onwards. This combined influence of a strong El Nino and pIOD dampened the positive precipitation response generated by the atmospheric sulfate loading. It should be noted that the surprisingly large positive precipitation anomaly at year 1 for SE Australia is an indicator of the uncertainty of the post-eruption values; however the significance of this event can still be seen by the comparison of the volcanic ensembles to the None ensemble.We note that our study has provided an analysis of climatic response to a set of forcings in a single climate model, which may limit the precise interpretation of responses to eruptions. Overall, volcanic aerosols remain an understudied climatic forcing such that the timing, magnitude, and spatialfootprint of past eruptions remains uncertain (Colose et al., 2016). In addition to uncertainties around the fundamental physical forcings, limitations still exist in the implementation of volcanic eruptions in climate models (Colose et al., 2016; Zambri et al., 2017). For example, Colose et al. (2016) suggest that improvements in model representations of volcanic particle size may improve the accuracy of model simulations. Furthermore, LeGrande et al. (2016) note that the chemistry and composition of a volcanic plume affects its climatic impact, which requires realistic representation in climatic models. Overall, these limitations in modelling eruptions and the idealised approach adopted here may mean that impacts simulated do not precisely match those of the proxy record.In summary, this paper aimed to identify the impact of large, tropical volcanism on the ENSO, IOD, and Australian rainfall. Averaging over multiple major eruptions and multiple simulations was undertaken to reduce the noise associated with the analysis of single volcanic eruptions, as seen by the 90th and 10th percentiles in Figs. 5, 7, 10, and 12. Results showed an El Nino and pIOD response in the immediate years following eruption, accompanied by positive precipitation anomalies over SE and NW Australia. The positive precipitation anomalies suggest that volcanic aerosol cooling dominates the precipitation response, rather than the effect of ENSO or IOD, despite aerosols also proving to be an important influence on these large-scale modes. Although this study focused on Australian rainfall regimes and its main cli-www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/ Clim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018matic drivers, this approach can be applied for exploring the impact of time evolving forcings, such as volcanism, in other regions.Data availability. All underlying research data is available on the CMIP5 archive, bar the water isotopes (https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/ search/cmip5/, last access: 9 June 2018).Competing interests. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Acknowledgements. We thank NASA GISS for institutional support. Sophie C. Lewis is funded through the Australian Research Council (ARC) DECRA Fellowship (DE160100092) and additional funding is provided through the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science (CE110001028). We also thank the NASA MAP programme for the continued support of Allegra N. LeGrande and Ron L. Miller Resources supporting this work were provided by the NASA High-End Computing (HEC) Program through the NASA Center for Climate Simulation (NCCS) at Goddard Space Flight Center.Edited by: Stefan Bronnimann Reviewed by: two anonymous referees 
__label__SUPPORT  Perturbations in the carbon cycle during the Carnian Humid Episode: carbonate carbon isotope records from southwestern China and northern Oman  Abstract: The Carnian Humid Episode is an interval of prominent climatic changes in the Late Triassic. We studied the carbon isotope (C) geochemistry of carbonates from sections in southwestern China and northern Oman. C records from the Yongyue section (western Guizhou, South China) show a progressive positive shift from 1.4 to 2.8 in the early to middle Julian 1 substage. This positive trend is followed by a swift negative shift of c. 4.2 from 2.8 to1.4 in the Julian 2 substage. C from theWadiMayhah section (northern Oman) shows a positive shift from 2.2 to 2.8 in the Julian 1 substage, followed by a negative shift of c. 3.2 from 2.8 to 0.3 in the Julian 2 substage. The C records from the two study sections generally correlate well with each other as well as with published records, pointing to a considerable input of isotopically light carbon starting in the late Julian 1 substage. Such a large amount of light carbon probably derived from direct degassing and the sedimentsill contact metamorphism of the Panthalassan Wrangellia Large Igneous Province and contemporary Tethyan volcanism. The voluminous volcanogenic greenhouse gases probably contributed to the warming pulse in the middle Carnian. Thus the drywet climatic transition during the Carnian Humid Episode is best interpreted as a warm climate-driven intensification of the activities of the atmospheric circulation and hydrological cycle. Received 31 December 2017; revised 27 July 2018; accepted 9 August 2018 First introduced as the Carnian Pluvial Event by Simms & Ruffell (1989), the Carnian Humid Episode (CHE, following the latest term of Ruffell et al. 2015) represents an interval of major climatic changes in the Triassic Period, but remains the least understood. The CHE is characterized by a transient phase (<1 myr) of increased humidity in an otherwise long-lasting arid climate (Kozur & Bachmann 2010; Preto et al. 2010; Chatalov 2017; Lopez-Gomez et al. 2017). The sudden climatic shift caused significant environmental and ecological changes, which are documented in both sedimentary and fossil records. On land, a clear shift in floral assemblages from xerophytes to hygrophytes is seen in the late Julian substage (Roghi et al. 2010;Mueller et al. 2016a, b), possibly promoting the changeovers in terrestrial tetrapods (Benton 1986, 1994; Bernardi et al. 2018). Peat-forming environments were steadily established in both North America and western Europe (Olsen 1988; Pott et al. 2008), representing their first occurrences in equatorial latitudes after the c. 15 myr coal gap from the endPermian mass extinction (Retallack et al. 1996). In the oceans, the drywet climatic transition caused an increase in siliciclastic influx to the epicontinental seas (Stefani et al. 2010; Arche & LopezGomez 2014). Increased turbidity probably suppressed carbonate production, resulting in the demise of platforms and reef ecosystems in the western Tethys (Flugel & Senowbari-Daryan 2001; Hornung et al. 2007a; Preto et al. 2010). In the eastern Tethys (SW China), the CHE is manifested by the development of extensive oxygendepleted facies on top of the fossiliferous platform and slope to basin carbonates (Sun et al. 2016). The deposition of black shales in the region was closely associated with anoxia and the development of local foreland basins on top of the former platform (Enos et al. 2006). Notable victims of the CHE in marine realms include platform and reef dwellers, such as encrinid crinoids, forams and scallops, as well as casualties in nektonic groups such as conodonts and ammonoids (Simms et al. 1994; Hornung et al. 2007a; Rigo et al. 2007; BouDagher-Fadel 2008; Chen et al. 2016). Losses on land are not yet fully quantified. Perturbations in the carbon cycle often coincided with bio-crisis intervals in the geological past, mirroring significant environmental changes. The carbon isotope ratio (C) of marine carbonates traces the carbon isotope composition of the dissolved inorganic carbon pool in the ocean and thus records a subtle equilibrium of carbon input (e.g. riverine carbon input and volcanic degassing) and carbon burial (e.g. carbonate and organic carbon) (Sharp 2017). Primary producers (i.e. phytoplankton and plants) preferentially utilize C, synthesizing isotopically light organic matter. The organic matter rains down from the photic zone to the seafloor and might be either re-oxidized or buried with sediments (Hayes et al. 1999). Positive C excursions are generally interpreted as evidence for enhanced burial of organic carbon, either due to increases in primary productivity in the euphotic zone, oxygen deficiency in the water column, or both at the same time (Saltzman & Thomas 2012). Negative C excursions are caused by an increased input of isotopically light carbon from, for example, the remineralization of organic carbon, volcanism and contact metamorphism. As the CHE coincided with voluminous eruptions of theWrangellia flood basalt, the negative C excursion during the CHE has been linked to the release of volcanogenic carbon (Dal Corso et al. 2012;Mueller et al. 2016b; Miller et al. 2017). The carbonate production crisis and sudden siliciclastic fluxes during the CHE generated a carbonate gap in large areas in both western Tethys and the peri-Gondwana margins (Hornung et al. 2018 The Author(s). Published by The Geological Society of London. All rights reserved. For permissions: http://www.geolsoc.org.uk/permissions. Publishing disclaimer: www.geolsoc.org.uk/pub_ethics Thematic set: The Mid-Carnian Episode Journal of the Geological Society Published online September 12, 2018 https://doi.org/10.1144/jgs2017-170 | Vol. 176 | 2019 | pp. 167177 Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/jgs/article-pdf/176/1/167/4607450/jgs2017-170.pdf by University of Arizona user on 20 February 2019 2007a, b). Only a small number of Ccarb studies have been carried out through (or partially through) the CHE interval (Keim et al. 2006; Hornung et al. 2007b; Dal Corso et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2016). Low total organic carbon contents and potential admixtures of terrestrial organic carbon in the siliciclastic rocks in different basins hinder the interpretation of Corg on the global scale (Dal Corso et al. 2015; Mueller et al. 2016a). All sedimentary rocks are subject to diagenetic alteration. Thus sedimentary C records should be interpreted with prudence, especially in case of shallow water carbonates formed in situ on platforms. The original isotopic signatures can be substantially influenced by meteoritic diagenesis, a higher proportion of metastable aragonite relative to calcite and the local remineralization of organic matter (Patterson & Walter 1994; Immenhauser et al. 2003; Swart & Eberli 2005). Deeper water carbonates (e.g. slopes and ramps) are less prone to diagenetic overprinting and may preserve primary Ccarb values, especially if they stabilized in a closed diagenetic system (Swart 2008). We carried out Ccarb analyses on carbonates from a carbonate ramp setting in South China (the eastern Palaeotethys) and a periplatform deeper basin setting in Oman (the southern margin of the western Neotethys). The new data show a comparable negative shift in Ccarb at the beginning of the CHE, pointing to an at least Tethyan-wide, if not global, disturbance in the global carbon cycle. Conclusions: The carbon isotope composition of carbonates from the Yongyue section (China) in the eastern Palaeotethys and the Wadi Mayhah section (Oman) in the southern Neotethys have been measured. Although the study sections were situated in different palaeogeographical settings, both show generally consistent patterns of 13Ccarb. The comparable negative 13Ccarb excursion suggests that the instability of the carbon cycle during the CHEwas Tethyan-wideand most likely a global phenomenon. The input of isotopically light carbon can be related to volcanic degassing and thermogenic heating of organic-rich sediments as a consequence of the Wrangellia LIP and other contemporary volcanic activities. The drywet transition during the CHE thus coincided with a large input of carbon into the atmosphere and a shift in sedimentation from (cherty) carbonates to shales in study areas, and was most probably due to the intensification of the hydrological cycle triggered by volcanism-induced global warming.Acknowledgements This is a contribution to Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Science Foundation) Research Unit TERSANE (FOR 2332: Temperature-related stressors as a unifying principle in ancient extinctions; Project Jo 219/15). S.R. and L.K. conducted fieldwork in Oman under authorization of the Public Authority for Mining, Sultanate of Oman. The authors thank D. Lutz and L.N. Wang for laboratory and field assistance. Comments from Editor J. Dal Corso and two reviewers significantly improved this paper.Funding The National Key R&D Program of China (grant no. 2016YFA0601100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 41602026, 41821001) financially supported this study. S.R. and L. K. were sponsored by the Austrian National Committee for IGCP (IGCP630).Correction notice Someminor spelling mistakes as well as the spelling of L. Krystyn has been corrected following a submission error.Scientific editing by Jacopo Dal Corso 
__label__SUPPORT  Early Eocene climatic, volcanic, and biotic events in the northwestern Tethyan Untersberg section, Austria  Abstract: The 40 m thick Untersberg section (Salzburg, Austria) of the Northern Calcareous Alps comprises the Palaeocene Eocene transition and spans the upper part of calcareous nannoplankton zone NP9 and the lower part of zone NP10 (subzone NP10a). These zones are equivalent to planktonic foraminifera zone P5 and the lower part of zone P6 (sub-zone P6a). The succession was deposited in a lower bathyal slope environment at a palaeodepth of about 2000 m. Within the dominantly marlstone succession, a 5.5-m-thick intercalation of red and green claystone and marly claystone represents the global negative carbon isotope excursion (CIE) which is used to recognize the PalaeoceneEocene boundary. The CIE was associated with a shallowing of the calcite compensation depth by at least 1 km. Throughout the section, clay mineral assemblages are dominated by smectite, indicating a seasonal climate with alternating wet and dry conditions. A 49% increase in detrital quartz and feldspar within the CIE-interval suggests enhanced continental run-off. This was probably the result of the establishment of a monsoonal setting, in which vegetation was sparse, while periodic high rainfall caused pronounced sediment transport. The increased terrestrially derived input is associated with abundant radiolarian casts indicating high primary productivity. This suggests that seasonal nutrient pulses resulting from intensified precipitation during the wet season have caused high surface-water fertility. The benthic foraminifera faunas of the samples rich in siliceous plankton are strongly dominated by Glomospira spp., Nuttalides truempyii, Abyssamina poagi, Anomalinoides praeacutus, Anomalinoides nobilis, and Oridorsalis spp. We assume that the GlomospiraNuttalides fauna consists of opportunistic species which quickly react to seasonally varying amounts of food. The calcareous nannoplankton assemblage of the CIE-interval is characterized by the first occurrences of the genus Rhomboaster and of Discoaster araneus and Discoaster mahmoudii, whereas Scapholithus apertus become extinct at the PalaeoceneEocene boundary. Within nannoplankton sub-zone NP10a, a series of primarily basaltic ashes give evidence for a major episode of explosive volcanism which can be correlated with the positive ash-series of the Fur-Formation in northern Denmark. The wide 5. Conclusion: In the northwestern Tethys, abundant siliceous plankton indicate high nutrient levels in oceanic surface waters in the basal Eocene. A coeval increase in both sedimentation rates and the amounts of terrestrially derived quartz and feldspar suggests that this high primary productivity was the result of enhanced continental run-off. It is assumed that the establishment of a pronounced monsoonal climate caused this increase in continental erosion.Frequent ash-layers indicate that intense explosive volcanism was another important environmental factor in the early Eocene. The biostratigraphical and geochemical correspondence of these tephras with ashes from the North Sea Basin suggests that these pyroclastic deposits are related to the continental breakup of Europe and Greenland. The distance the tephras in the northwestern Tethyan sections were dispersed from their proposed magmatic source in the North Atlantic igneous province (ca. 4000 km) indicates that the eruptions were extremely powerful and emitted large volumes of ash and gases into the lower stratosphere. It can be assumed that these eruptions greatly affected the radiation of the sun and, therefore, caused a decrease of surface temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere. As basaltic eruptions require watermagma interaction, the onset of eruptive activity was probably an effect of the emergence of part of the North Atlantic igneous province above sea level. The tephra layers are restricted to sub-zone NP10a and vanish at the top of this sub-zone. The transgression of the London clay and the Ieper clay in the North Sea basin was an effect of a pronounced sea-level rise at the base of sub-zone NP10b (Aubry, 1996; Knox, 1998). The termination of basaltic eruptions at that stratigraphic level suggests that the rising sea level caused the drowning of the volcanic source area.H. Egger et al. / Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 217 (2005) 243264262 
__label__SUPPORT  Evidence for a volcanic cooling signal in a 335year coral record from New Caledonia  Abstract: Although volcanic cooling events have been detected in tree ring records, their occurrence in marine records has received much less attention. Herein we report results from a 335-year oxygen isotope record (1657-1992) from a New Caledonia coral indicating that as many as 16 interannual-scale cooling events occur within 1 year of a volcanic eruption as determined by ice core records. There are also pentadal/decadal-scale cooling events beginning in 1675, 1813, and 1903 that immediately postdate volcanic eruptions. However, the interannual correspondences are complicated by the fact that some of the cooling events also coincide with E1 Nifios, which cause cooling in this part of the western South Pacific. If our conclusions are substantiated by further work, occurrence of distinct volcanic cooling signals may enable refinement of coral chronologies by use of the event stratigraphic approach, with the most promising correlation horizons being associated with the following eruptions: 1808 (Unknown), 1813-1821 (several eruptions), 1835 (Coseguina), 1883 (Krakatau), and possibly 1963 (Agung). 
__label__SUPPORT  Sulfate source inventories from a Svalbard ice core record spanning the Industrial Revolution  Abstract: [1] The 800-year sulfate record from Lomonosovfonna was analyzed by a novel multiple linear regression algorithm that attempts to explain sulfate variability in terms of other chemical species measured in the core and sulfur emission inventories. We use three statistical approaches to determine sulfate sources. We examine trends using singular spectrum analysis with confidence intervals, finding clear evidence that anthropogenic sources are important but not dominant; we use cross-wavelet coherence to examine significant multidecadal covariance in terrestrial sulfate; but our main tool is multiple regression analysis of the sulfate dependency on other ions and anthropogenic emission inventories. Models are fitted in a moving time window of typically 50 years length, explaining 80% of the sulfate variance. A suite of model predictors are examined, and the variation in relative magnitudes of the model coefficients along the core can be used to infer variations in the strength of various sulfate sources. We observe large changes in sulfate sources at the end of the Little Ice Age associated with changes in Barents Sea marine productivity, changes in North Atlantic sulfate input and a long-lasting period of disturbance caused by the large Laki volcanic eruption. Modeling sulfur emission inventories shows that western Europe contributes about 15% of the sulfate budget, with essentially no input from other regions, in contrast with predictions from global circulation models incorporating sulfur chemistry. Multidecadal cycles are mainly confined to the Little Ice Age and most likely associated with increased storminess and enhanced deposition of both marine aerosol and biogenic sulfate from the Atlantic Ocean. The model residuals do not show a normal distribution but display very large spikes. Unexpectedly, those significant at the 99% level can be closely matched to major volcanic eruptions using independent dating methods. The 20th century sulfate in the core is inventoried as sea salt (15%), terrestrial (10%), volcanic (510%), western European anthropogenic (1025%), Barents Sea biogenic (2040%), and Atlantic biogenic (1015%). 5. Summary and Conclusions: [36] Multiple linear regression modeling of the sulfate profile unexpectedly showed that the best predictors were nitrate and magnesium. These seem to represent acid and neutral components of sulfate, most likely because acids are colocated in the ice and magnesium is sourced from both sea salt and terrestrial sources. Moore et al. [2005a] show that postdepositional percolation is the primary agent for determining the location of species in the ice core, on shortdistance scales corresponding to a few annual layers of accumulation. Therefore it is most likely that it is postdepositional coelution of ions that results in the relationships seen in the MLR models. For this reason we need to useaNote the Laki 1783 signal was removed before modeling. bKekonen et al. [2005]. cPohjola et al. [2002b]. dSiebert and Simkin [20022005]. VEI is the volcanic explosivity index.D15307 MOORE ET AL.: SULFATE SOURCES IN A SVALBARD ICE CORE10 of 13D15307many more models than just the best fitting MLR model to understand the sulfate budget in the ice core. The expected predictors, salt, MSA, calcium are useful conceptually as we know that they are representative of particular sources. [37] Percolation longer than the smoothing window would simply introduce a smoothing to the MLR model residuals, but we do not see such an effect. A residual peak is about the length of the smoothing window (except deep in the core, such as the 1259 event), as would be expected of volcanic events affected by slow diffusion processes. This is good evidence that the assumptions made concerning the degree of smoothing due to percolation are sufficiently conservative. In effect we have verified a preservation model that suggests that the net effect of dating and percolation smoothing of the ion records is a limiting resolution of 3 years. Therefore there is no advantage is to be gained in fitting the ice core record to external emission inventories by using a percolation correcting model to recover the original ion concentrations. [38] Sea-salt sulfate amounts to about 18% of the mean post-1918 sulfate budget of about 280 ppb or 5.8 meq L 1. Calcium is almost entirely of non-sea-salt origin in the Lomonosovfonna core, and model 3 in Table 1 suggests that it contributes about 10% of the sulfate budget. Kekonen et al. [2005a] show that the dominant 2530-year band covariation of calcium with sulfate has an amplitude of about 1 meq L 1 (about 50 ppb of SO42 ), suggesting that the terrestrial input is largely modulated by this periodicity. So a terrestrial source of sulfate primarily deposited with calcium contributes on average about 10% of the post-1918 sulfate budget. Long-period (multidecadal) cycles were relatively strong during the LIA, but apparently related only to the magnesium predictor of sulfate, not with the nitrate predictor. This can be explained by increased storminess and wind speeds in the LIA bringing both sea-salt aerosol and Atlantic biogenic sulfate to the ice cap. [39] MSA as a predictor of sulfate is most likely due to both having a common DMS source. This must be mostly local as the dramatic change in the MSA ion profiles at the end of LIA was very likely caused by the sea ice edge moving north. However, biogenic acidic sulfate coming from production in the Atlantic may also be carried to Lomonosovfonna with storms [Hara et al., 1997]. This is a viable mechanism as biogenic production in the Atlantic starts much earlier in the spring, close to the peak storm season, and is much greater than in the Barents Sea [Lancelot and Wassmann, 1994]. From Figure 4c it can be seen that the coefficient of MSA increases dramatically at the end of the LIA. The fraction of sulfate coming from Barents Sea DMS emission should be given by the proportion of sulfate predicted by MSA in an appropriate MLRmodel. Table 1, model 5 is one such model where we interpret the MSA contribution to represent local Barents Sea production, magnesium represents the sea salt, terrestrial and Atlantic acid contribution, while anthropogenic and other acidic sources are represented by western European emissions and nitrate. The nitrate coefficient is not significant in the model, but we include it as we wish to show that even allowing all plausible acidic components, magnesium still overrepresents sulfate. Magnesium accounts for 40% of sulfate, of which 1520% is from sea salt and 10% from terrestrial sources, leaving 1015% as the Atlantic biogenic sulfate contribution. MSA represents about 30%, similar modeling of the LIA shows only 20% sulfate from MSA. The much reduced concentrations of MSA in post-LIA ice imply that the MSA/nss SO42branching ratio has changed by a much larger amount: to favor H2SO4 production over MSA. [40] Anthropogenic sulfate seems to account for about 15% of the total sulfate since 1918 and appears to have a western European source. Local sources, eastern Europe, and North America make no significant contribution. GotoAzuma and Koerner [2001], compare a sulfate record extending to the 1930s from Snfonnafjella in Svalbard with sulfur emissions from Eurasia and North America, qualitatively finding emissions from Eurasia match the trend in SO42 better than those from North America. This is consistent with our findings, though as we have separated the western and eastern European contributions we see no good fits between eastern sources and SO42 either in trends or in detailed three-point sample analysis. This is unexpected from GCMs incorporating sulfur chemical process [Christensen, 1997] and may possibly be explained by the altitude of Lomonosovfonna; though it is relatively low, it is above the inversion layer in contrast with all the monitoring stations collecting sulfur aerosol. [41] Thus summing up the various lines of evidence, the typical 20th century sulfate budget appears to be composed as in Table 3. Probably the weakest estimate is for the Atlantic biogenic contribution which is based on inferences from the excess magnesium contribution. Best guesses for the other contributions would be sea salt: 18% (mean seawater ratio); western European emissions: 18% (Table 1, model 3); terrestrial dust: 10% (decadal covariability); Barents sea biogenic: 30% (arguments above); volcanic + measurement error: 15% (MLR variance accounted for), which sums to 91%. This leaves about 10% unexplained which is consistent with the estimate for Atlantic biogenic activity in Table 3. [42] One surprising finding is the enormously long-lasting impact of the Laki volcanic event. Kekonen et al. [2005b] show that the signal affects temperatures for several yearsD15307 MOORE ET AL.: SULFATE SOURCES IN A SVALBARD ICE CORE11 of 13D15307after the sulfate deposition itself, but here we remove that signal prior to any modeling. We observe that the impact is clearly felt for some time after the event by the sudden switch from magnesium to nitrate as most important predictor, the only similar switch occurring at the end of the LIA (Figure 4b). Further, the volcanic interpretation in Table 2 suggests that the accumulation rate was anomalously low in the period around Laki. So either the Laki eruption occurred during an anomalous period, or that its influence was more pervasive in the chemistry of the atmosphere and possibly the circulation patterns of both oceans and atmosphere than previously realized. [43] It seems clear that the largest volcanic eruption signals originate in Iceland or the Far East: We see no conclusive signals from North America. This contrasts with signals seen in Greenland where transport paths over the pole from Alaska seem much more common than for Svalbard. Despite this natural pollution pathway, we see no evidence for eastern European or Asian anthropogenic sulfur, perhaps because those are low-altitude signals rather than the large volcanic events that inject sulfur to the high troposphere or stratosphere.[44] Acknowledgments. The Finnish Forest Research Institute Research Station, Rovaniemi, provided cold and clean room facilities. The drilling of the Lomonosovfonna 1997 ice core was financed by the Norwegian Polar Institute and IMAU, Utrecht University. The Finnish Academy Figare project and the Thule Institute financed the chemical and mathematical analysis. We also thank all the field participants over the many seasons, our editor John Austin, and three anonymous referees for their comments. 
__label__SUPPORT  Voluminous silicic eruptions during late Permian Emeishan igneous province and link to climate cooling Introduction: Basaltic eruptions associated with large igneous provinces (LIPs) have been widely discussed to induce climate warming via CO2 degassing or cooling by sulfur gas emission (e.g., Jolley and Widdowson, 2005; Mussard et al., 2014; Self et al., 2006, 2014; Zhang et al., 2013). However the climatic impact of LIP silicic volcanism is often overlooked even though it may constitute a substantial component of many LIPs (Bryan et al., 2002) and have a potential linkage with regional or hemispheric climate cooling via delivering sulfur gases and ash into the upper atmosphere (Scaillet and Macdonald, 2006). This is mainly because of the poor preservation of such volcanic activity due to erosion, especially for pre-Mesozoic provinces (Bryan et al., 2002). In the late Permian Emeishan volcanic province in SW China (Chung and Jahn, 1995; Fig. 1A), silicic volcanic rocks are only a very rare component (<1%) of the total exposed igneous rocks (Shellnutt and Jahn, 2010; Xu et al., 2010). Their rarity in the rock archive might * Corresponding author. E-mail address: yjhcug@126.com (J. Yang). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2015.09.050 0012-821X/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. result from their dispersal due to the explosive nature of the silicic activity (e.g., Xu et al., 2010) and the 9. Conclusions: Silicic volcanism in LIPs has the potential to release massive volumes of volcanic gases into stratosphere and affect climate. Relative to flood basalts, silicic volcanic rocks have low preservation potential because of their preferential erosion and explosive nature, and thus their impact on environmental change is often overlooked. Estimating the original volume of silicic eruptions and the potential emissions of climate-sensitive gases (e.g., SO2) is important to fully understand the climate impact of LIP volcanism. In the Emeishan province of SW China, silicic volcanic rocks are restricted to the top of few volcanic sequences and form only a very minor component of the preserved rock record of the LIP. This volcanic province has been subject to extensive erosion after emplacement in the Late Permian as indicated by the petrological, geochemical and detrital zircon provenance analysis from the Late Permian sedimentary rocks in the adjacent basin. Modal and geochemical compositions of the derived sandstones indicate that the Emeishan source rocks include approximately 30% silicic volcanic rocks by volume. Two independent methods estimate the total volume of eroded Emeishan volcanic rocks in the Late Permian to be at 3 104 or 4.5 104 km3. Combining these estimates indicates that Emeishan silicic eruptions were at least 1 104 km3 in volume. Zircon grains within the sandstones, which are assumed to be derived from the Emeishan silicic source rocks, exhibit unimodal Late Permian ages of around 260 Ma and trace element trends that closely match zircons from Icelandic and Yellowstone rhyolitic rocks of hot-spot magmatic origins. Zircons from lower stratigraphic samples within the Shaiwa Formation have much lower Th/Nb and U/Yb ratios than those from the upper samples with Hf(t) values being positive for the lower samples and generally negative for the upper ones. These data suggest Emeishan silicic source rocks were generated by fractional crystallization of associated high-Ti basaltic magmas with decreasing crustal assimilation, consistent with studies on remnant Emeishan rhyolites and trachytes. Following experimental and theoretical calculations, the conservative estimate of 1 104 km3 basalt-derived silicic volcanism would potentially release 1 1017 g bulk sulfur. The now predominantly eroded silicic volcanic component of the Emeishan LIP therefore provided a hitherto unrecognized massive sulfur gas emission that was likely to significantly contribute to the global climate cooling at the Capitanian-Wuchiapingian transition (260 Ma). This volcano-climate effect hypothesis can be evaluated by climate proxy studies combined with high-precision dating from related sedimentary sequences. 
__label__SUPPORT  Volcanic stratospheric sulfur injections and aerosol optical depth from 500 BCE to 1900 CE  Abstract: The injection of sulfur into the stratosphere by explosive volcanic eruptions is the cause of significant climate variability. Based on sulfate records from a suite of ice cores from Greenland and Antarctica, the eVolv2k database includes estimates of the magnitudes and approximate source latitudes of major volcanic stratospheric sulfur injection (VSSI) events from 500 BCE to 1900 CE, constituting an update of prior reconstructions and an extension of the record by 1000 years. The database incorporates improvements to the ice core records (in terms of synchronisation and dating) and refinements to the methods used to estimate VSSI from ice core records, and it includes first estimates of the random uncertainties in VSSI values. VSSI estimates for many of the largest eruptions, including Samalas (1257), Tambora (1815), and Laki (1783), are within 10 % of prior estimates. A number of strong events are included in eVolv2k which are largely underestimated or not included in earlier VSSI reconstructions, including events in 540, 574, 682, and 1108 CE. The long-term annual mean VSSI from major volcanic eruptions is estimated to be 0.5 Tg [S]yr1, 50 % greater than a prior reconstruction due to the identification of more events and an increase in the magnitude of many intermediate events. A long-term latitudinally and monthly resolved stratospheric aerosol optical depth (SAOD) time series is reconstructed from the eVolv2k VSSI estimates, and the resulting global mean SAOD is found to be similar (within 33 %) to a prior reconstruction for most of the largest eruptions. The long-term (500 BCE1900 CE) average global mean SAOD estimated from the eVolv2k VSSI estimates including a constant background injection of stratospheric sulfur is 0.014, 30 % greater than a prior reconstruction. These new long-term reconstructions of past VSSI and SAOD variability give context to recent volcanic forcing, suggesting that the 20th century was a period of somewhat weaker than average volcanic forcing, with current best estimates of 20th century mean VSSI and SAOD values being 25 and 14 % less, respectively, than the mean of the 500 BCE to 1900 CE period. The reconstructed VSSI and SAOD data are available at https://doi.org/10.1594/WDCC/eVolv2k_v2. 5 Conclusions and discussion: This paper presents a new reconstruction of the climatic influence of major volcanic eruptions over the time span from 500 BCE to 1900 CE. The eVolv2k reconstructions of volcanic VSSI and SAOD presented here represent, first and foremost, the results of improved dating, resolution, and synchronisation of ice core sulfate records from Antarctica and Greenland (Sigl et al., 2014, 2015). Given the improvements in methodologies used to date and synchronise ice core records including automated synchronising and absolute dating through the matching of signatures of cosmogenic isotopes in ice cores and tree rings in the eighth century (Sigl et al., 2015) the eVolv2k reconstruction can be confidently assumed to be a more accurate estimate of volcanic forcing compared to prior reconstructions, particularly for time periods before 1250 CE. This assertion is supported by strong correlation between the newly compiled volcanic ice core records and instances of sudden large-scale cooling from dendrochronological climate reconstructions (Sigl et al., 2015).The eVolv2k reconstruction provides the input data for climate model simulations which aim to include external climate forcing agents as far back in time as 500 BCE. Volcanic stratospheric sulfur injection (VSSI) estimates can be directly ingested by suitable aerosol climate models. Alternatively, the EVA forcing generator (Toohey et al., 2016b) can be used to produce stratospheric aerosol optical properties,Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 809831, 2017 www.earth-syst-sci-data.net/9/809/2017/including the stratospheric aerosol optical depth (SAOD) based on the VSSI record. Aerosol optical properties can then be used as boundary conditions for model simulations. The eVolv2k reconstruction is the recommended volcanic forcing for transient simulations within the Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project (PMIP; Jungclaus et al., 2016) and therefore represents an update to the reconstructions most often used in prior palaeo-simulations, including the IVI2 (Gao et al., 2008) and ICI (Crowley and Unterman, 2013) forcing datasets.The eVolv2k VSSI estimates and the related SAOD perturbations produced via the EVA forcing generator show broad agreement with the IVI2 and ICI reconstructions over the 12501900 period in terms of the magnitudes of the largest volcanic events. For VSSI, agreement between eVolv2k and IVI2 is the product of compensatory differences, including generally smaller ice core flux estimates and a larger effective transfer function used to scale ice core sulfate fluxes into VSSI estimates. For the SAOD reconstructions, agreement between the EVA(eVolv2k) and ICI reconstructions reflects relative consistency in the ice core composites (after 1250) constructed in both efforts and a related methodology, wherein observations following the 1991 Pinatubo eruption are used to define the scaling from ice core sulfate to SAOD. Before 1250 CE, the eVolv2k VSSI and SAOD reconstructions include a number of events which are comparatively underestimated or completely missing in prior reconstructions. These updated estimates promise improvements in the attribution of forced and unforced climate variability before 1250 CE.In general, estimates of long-term mean VSSI and SAOD in eVolv2k are larger than prior reconstructions. For VSSI, this reflects an increase in the number of identified events and an increase in the estimated magnitude for a number of moderate to strong events. The relative increase in long-term mean SAOD compared to prior work is primarily due to the inclusion of a non-zero minimum (or background) SAOD, which is consistent with the minimum in stratospheric SAOD observed by satellite sensors around the year 2000 CE. The long-term estimates of VSSI and SAOD evolution give context to the best current estimates of 20th century volcanic forcing. An independent estimate of 20th century mean VSSI is about 25 % smaller than the long-term eVolv2k mean. Assuming stationarity of global eruption frequencies, it is therefore more likely than not that the 21st century mean volcanic forcing will be greater than that of the 20th century.For the first time, the eVolv2k reconstruction provides estimates of the uncertainty in volcanic VSSI estimates based on estimated uncertainty in the ice core sulfate composites and the error inherent in using ice sheet average fluxes as a proxy for the full hemispheric sulfate deposition (and therefore the hemispheric atmospheric sulfate loading). These error estimates depend on the number of ice cores used in the composite and the degree of variation seen between the ice cores. For most of the largest volcanic events, the estimated uncertaintyis around 2030 %, while for smaller events the estimated error reaches values of > 50 %. Systematic errors are also significant, representing the possibility that VSSI or SAOD estimates are biased in the long-term average. The construction of transfer functions from the NWT of the 1950s and 1960s and from the single data point of the 1991 Pinatubo eruption carries significant uncertainties regarding the injection magnitudes and injection heights. Observational estimates of the VSSI of Pinatubo have uncertainties of 20 % (Guo et al., 2004), and recent modelling studies have argued for a VSSI from Pinatubo half that of the usual estimates (e.g. Dhomse et al., 2014). An important uncertainty in the reconstruction of volcanic forcing stems from the inability to differentiate between ice core sulfate from vast, stratospheric sulfate clouds and that from relatively local effusive eruptions. Icelandic eruptions with large effusive emissions, like Laki or the 20142015 Holuhraun eruption (Schmidt et al., 2015), could theoretically lead to large sulfate fluxes to the Greenland ice sheets with little to no significant stratospheric injection. VSSI and SAOD estimates then based on the raw Greenland sulfate records would produce large overestimates of the global effects of the eruptions. This issue led Crowley and Unterman (2013) to mute the impact of Greenland sulfate fluxes for signals that could be attributed to Icelandic eruptions in the ICI reconstruction. On the other hand, the vertical distribution of the sulfur emissions by Laki are still under debate (Lanciki et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2012), and while it seems likely that the Greenland sulfate signal for Laki does contain some component related to tropospheric emissions, the proportion of tropospheric to stratospheric injections is very unclear. For these reasons, we have not implemented a correction to the VSSI estimates of Laki or other known or suspected Icelandic eruptions. Uncertainties in the scaling procedures used within the EVA forcing generator certainly add another level of uncertainty to the SAOD estimates: for example, uncertainty in the measured SAOD after Pinatubo translates directly into systematic uncertainty in the SAOD estimated by EVA.Future work should be able to further refine the estimates of VSSI and SAOD presented here. First, a larger network of high-quality ice core sulfate records from Greenland should reduce random errors in the composite flux due to limited sampling. Reducing uncertainty in the transfer functions used to link atmospheric sulfate content and ice core sulfate fluxes would greatly improve estimates of volcanic forcing. Studies with atmospheric models show some promise (Gao et al., 2007; Toohey et al., 2013; Marshall et al., 2017), but inter-model differences in stratospheric sulfate evolution highlight substantial uncertainties in the physical processes controlling aerosol growth and transport (Zanchettin et al., 2016). Emerging techniques to differentiate sulfur from tropospheric vs. stratospheric origin (e.g. Lanciki et al., 2012) offer potential strategies for reducing uncertainties in future volcanic forcing reconstructions. Finally, the continued extension of ice core volcanic records to thewww.earth-syst-sci-data.net/9/809/2017/ Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 809831, 2017present should soon provide important information, since anthropogenic sulfate flux over Greenland contaminated over much of the 20th century by anthropogenic sulfur emissions has now almost reached pre-industrial levels, allowing for the detection of moderate volcanic eruptions in Greenland.Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 9, 809831, 2017 www.earth-syst-sci-data.net/9/809/2017/ 
__label__SUPPORT  Calcium and calcium isotope changes during carbon cycle perturbations at the endPermian  Abstract: Negative carbon and calcium isotope excursions, as well as climate shifts, took place during the most severe mass extinction event in Earths history, the end-Permian (252 Ma). Investigating the connection between carbon and calcium cycles during transient carbon cycle perturbation events, such as the end-Permian, may help resolve the intricacies between the coupled calcium-carbon cycles, as well as provide a tool for constraining the causes of mass extinction. Here we identify the deficiencies of a simplified calcium model employed in several previous studies, and we demonstrate the importance of a fully coupled carbon cycle model when investigating the dynamics of carbon and calcium cycling. Simulations with a modified version of the Long-term Ocean-atmosphere-Sediment CArbon cycle Reservoir model, which includes a fully coupled carbon-calcium cycle, indicate that increased weathering rates and ocean acidification (potentially caused by Siberian Trap volcanism) are not capable of producing trends observed in the record, as previously claimed. Our model results suggest that combined effects of carbon input via Siberian Trap volcanism (12,000 Pg C), the cessation of biological carbon export, and variable calcium isotope fractionation (due to a change in the seawater carbonate ion concentration) represents a more plausible scenario. This scenario successfully reconciles 13C and 44Ca trends observed in the sediment record, as well as the proposed warming of >6C. 7. Conclusions: Several previous studies have employed a simple calcium-only model (following Payne et al. [2010]) with the attempt to resolve the dynamics and links between carbon and calcium cycles as well as the cause of the mass extinction during the end-Permian [Payne et al., 2010; Hinojosa et al., 2012] and more recently during the Toarcian oceanic anoxic event (Early Jurassic) [Brazier et al., 2015]. Here we have identified the deficiencies in such a simplified approach and showed the importance of a fully coupled calcium-carbon cycle model.The modeling framework presented here successfully reconciles the end-Permian trends in 13C and 44Ca recorded in carbonate sediments. The model also predicts a 50 kyr rise in atmospheric CO2 causing a global temperature increase of more than 6C. Our model results suggest that the end-Permian mass extinction and the perturbation in carbon-calcium cycling was due to a combination of several factors, including introduction of about 12,000 Pg of carbon through Siberian Trap volcanism, the collapse of ocean primary productivity, and a variable calcium isotope fractionation between seawater and buried carbonates during inorganic precipitation due to changing [CO23 ]. Most importantly, accelerated weathering rates alone that arise due to the perturbation in the carbon cycle are most likely insufficient to directly produce a significant impact on the calcium cycle, contrary to the claims of previous studies. 
__label__SUPPORT  Hydrothermal venting of greenhouse gases triggering Early Jurassic global warming  Abstract: The climate change in the Toarcian (Early Jurassic) was characterized by a major perturbation of the global carbon cycle. The event lasted for approximately 200,000 years and was manifested by a global warming of 6 C, anoxic conditions in the oceans, and extinction of marine species. The triggering mechanisms for the perturbation and environmental change are however strongly debated. Here, we present evidence for a rapid formation and transport of greenhouse gases from the deep sedimentary reservoirs in the Karoo Basin, South Africa. Magmatic sills were emplaced during the initial stages of formation of the Early Jurassic Karoo Large Igneous Province, and had a profound influence on the fate of light elements in the organic-rich sedimentary host rocks. Total organic carbon contents and vitrinite reflectivity data from contact aureoles around the sills show that organic carbon was lost from the country rocks during heating. We present data from a new type of geological structures, termed breccia pipes, rooted in the aureoles within the shale of the Western Karoo Basin. The breccia pipes are cylindrical structures up to 150 meters in diameter and are mainly comprised of brecciated and baked black shale. Thousands of breccia pipes were formed due to gas pressure build-up during metamorphism of the shales, resulting in venting of greenhouse gases to the Toarcian atmosphere. Mass balance calculations constrained by new aureole data show that up to 1800 Gt of CO2 was formed from organic material in the western Karoo Basin. About 15 times this amount of CO2 (27,400 Gt) may have formed in the entire basin during the intrusive event. UPb dating of zircons from a sill related to many of the pipes demonstrates that the magma was emplaced 182.50.4 million years ago. This supports a causal relationship between the intrusive volcanism, the gas venting, and the Toarcian global warming. 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 6. Conclusions: The new geological, geochemical and geochronology data represent evidence for large scale carbon gas venting in the Early Jurassic. It is likely that the many thousands of breccia pipes formed within the 200,000 yr time span of the Toarcian global warming. Our data show that nearly 2000 Gt CO2 could have been produced from the Ecca Group in the western Karoo Basin. This is a conservative estimate considering the total area with sill intrusions in organic rich shale, which has a production potential of at least 27,400 Gt CO2. The venting from the Karoo Basin could consequently have acted as the main trigger for the Toarcian carbon cycle perturbation. The Toarcian greenhouse would have been further accelerated by the metamorphism of coal deposits in Antarctica, long term lava degassing from the KarooFerrar province, astronomical climate forcing [3], and by feedback mechanisms such as melting of gas hydrates [2,4].Our new data clearly tie the Toarcian carbon cycle perturbation to the Karoo LIP and the volcanic Karoo Basin. Our hypothesis highlights the importance of the emplacement environment of LIPs in causing global environmental climate changes. Ultimately, an understanding of the triggering mechanism and consequences of previous climatic changes driven by carbon gas emissions is highly relevant for predicting the consequences of current anthropogenic carbon emissions, as these events are likely of similar magnitude and duration. 
__label__SUPPORT  A volcanic trigger for the Late Ordovician mass extinction? Mercury data from south China and Laurentia  Abstract: The Late Ordovician mass extinction (LOME), one of the five largest Phanerozoic biodiversity depletions, occurred in two pulses associated with the expansion and contraction of ice sheets on Gondwana during the Hirnantian Age. It is widely recognized that environmental disruptions associated with changing glacial conditions contributed to the extinctions, but neither the kill mechanisms nor the causes of glacial expansion are well understood. Here we report anomalously high Hg concentrations in marine strata from south China and Laurentia deposited immediately before, during, and after the Hirnantian glacial maximum that we interpret to reflect the emplacement of a large igneous province (LIP). An initial Hg enrichment occurs in the late Katian Age, while a second enrichment occurs immediately below the Katian-Hirnantian boundary, which marks the first pulse of extinction. Further Hg enrichment occurs in strata deposited during glacioeustatic sea-level fall and the glacial maximum. We propose that these Hg enrichments are products of multiple phases of LIP volcanism. While elevated Hg concentrations have been linked to LIP emplacement coincident with other Phanerozoic mass extinctions, the climate response during the LOME may have been unique owing to different climatic boundary conditions, including preexisting ice sheets. Our observations support a volcanic trigger for the LOME and further point to LIP volcanism as a primary driver of environmental changes that caused mass extinctions. INTRODUCTION Paleoclimate records indicate global cooling during ~35 m.y. of the Early and Middle Ordovician, a relatively stable climate in the ~8-m.y.long Katian Age, and a glacial maximum in the Hirnantian Age (445.2 443.8 Ma) (Trotter et al., 2008; Finnegan et al., 2011; Melchin et al., 2013). Cooling likely resulted in the establishment of ice sheets on polar Gondwana in the Katian Age or even earlier (Saltzman and Young, 2005; Finnegan et al., 2011; Pohl et al., 2016). The subsequent rapid expansion of Hirnantian ice sheets resulted in glacioeustatic sea-level fall and decreased temperatures (Finnegan et al., 2011) associated with the first pulse of the Late Ordovician mass extinction (LOME) (Melchin et al., 2013). The second pulse of the LOME occurred as glaciers melted, oceans warmed, and anoxic seawater transgressed the shelves (Melchin et al., 2013). The cause of the glacial advance is unknown, but has been attributed to CO2 levels falling below a critical threshold (Herrmann et al., 2004). Lefebvre et al. (2010) used a coupled biogeochemical-energy balance model to demonstrate that chemical weathering of a hypothetical late Katian large igneous province (LIP) could have lowered CO2 over millions of years to cause major ice sheet growth. However, geological and geochemical evidence of such an eruption are currently lacking, and it is unclear if the apparent rapid time scale of the Hirnantian glacial advance is consistent with a weathering mechanism. Phanerozoic mass extinctions have been linked geochronologically and mechanistically to the emplacement of LIPs (Courtillot and Renne, 2003; Bond and Wignall, 2014). CO2 release associated with LIP emplacement can produce greenhouse warming, ocean acidification, and marine anoxia (Self et al., 2014), and SO2 release can induce short-term cooling through the production of stratospheric sulfur aerosols (Schmidt et al., 2015). Volcanism is the major preanthropogenic source of mercury to Earths surface environments (Selin, 2009), and the accumulation of Hg in sediment can be used as a proxy for ancient volcanic events (Sanei et al., 2012; Font et al., 2016; Thibodeau et al., 2016). The atmospheric residence time of Hg is long (~12 yr) (Selin, 2009) relative to atmospheric mixing time, and volcanogenic Hg can accumulate globally (Schuster et al., 2002). Because Hg binds to organic matter in marine settings, Hg concentration per unit of total organic carbon (TOC) is a useful measure of environmental Hg loading in modern (Fitzgerald et al., 2007) and ancient (Sanei et al., 2012) environments. Hg and Hg/TOC enrichments are observed in marine strata deposited during Phanerozoic mass extinctions associated with known LIPs, including the Siberian Traps at the Permian-Triassic boundary (Sanei et al., 2012), the Central Atlantic magmatic province at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary (Thibodeau et al., 2016), and the Deccan Traps at the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary (Font et al., 2016). GEOLOGIC SETTING AND METHODS In order to develop records of Hg loading associated with the LOME, we analyzed samples from successions in south China and Laurentia spanning the interval of the LOME and Hirnantian glacial maximum (Fig. 1). GEOLOGY, July 2017; v. 45; no. 7; p. 631634 | Data Repository item 2017205 | doi:10.1130/G38940.1 | Published online 01 May 2017 2017 The Authors. Gold Open Access: This paper is published under the terms of the CC-BY license. Laurentia South China CONCLUSION: We document three Hg enrichments associated with the LOME and suggest that they are markers of LIP volcanism. While specific mechanisms linking LIP volcanism to the LOME and Hirnantian glacial maximum are speculative until direct geological and geochronological evidence of a late KatianHirnantian LIP is found, the stratigraphic position of the oldest of the Hg anomalies is consistent with modeling predictions linking the chemical weathering of a Katian LIP to Late Ordovician cooling. If the Hg enrichments just preceding the Katian-Hirnantian boundary and through the Hirnantian glacial maximum represent further LIP activity, the synchronous volcanism and glacial expansion may be reconcilable through the albedo effects of volcanic sulfate aerosols. If confirmed, the LIP inferred from our Hg data would join those associated with mass extinction events throughout the Phanerozoic and strengthen the case for LIP volcanism as a primary driver of the environmental changes that caused mass extinction of life on Earth.Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gsa/geology/article-pdf/45/7/631/998935/631.pdf by University of Arizona user on 20 February 2019634 www.gsapubs.org | Volume 45 | Number 7 | GEOLOGY 
__label__SUPPORT  Eighthundred years of summer temperature variations in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula reconstructed from tree rings  Abstract: warmer than the preceding centuries, does not show unprecedented warmth in the last 800 years. Three ensembles of climate simulations conducted with two global atmosphere ocean general circulation climate models (GCMs), considering different external forcings, were used for comparison: ECHO-G (Erik) and MPI-ESM (E1 and E2). Additionally, individual simulations were available from GCM included in the fifth Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, as well as single-forcing simulations performed with MPI-ESM. The comparison of the reconstructed and simulated temperatures revealed a close agreement of NCZTjaso with the simulations performed with total solar irradiance forcing with wider amplitude. Furthermore, the correlations with single-forcing simulations suggest volcanism as the main factor controlling preindustrial summer temperature variations in the Cazorla Range over the last five centuries. The persistent anti-correlation between NCZTjaso and simulated temperatures during the MCALIA transitional period underlines the current Abstract July-to-October temperature variations are reconstructed for the last 800 years based on tree-ring widths from the Cazorla Range. Annual tree-ring width at this site has been found to be negatively correlated with temperature of the previous summer. This relationship is genuine, metabolically plausible, and cannot be explained as an indirect correlation mediated by hydroclimate. The resulting reconstruction (NCZTjaso) represents the southernmost annually resolved temperature record based on tree-rings in Europe and provides detailed information on the regional climate evolution during the Late Holocene in the southeast of the Iberian Peninsula. The tree-ring based temperature reconstruction of Cazorla Range reveals predominantly warm summer temperatures during the transition between the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA) and the Little Ice Age (LIA) from the 13th to the mid of the sixteenth century. The LIA spanned a slightly longer time (15001930 CE) than in other European summer temperature reconstructions from the Alps and Pyrenees. The twentieth century, though 
__label__SUPPORT  Volcanic and Solar Forcing of Climate Change during the Preindustrial Era  Abstract: The climate response to variability in volcanic aerosols and solar irradiance, the primary forcings during the preindustrial era, is examined in a stratosphere-resolving general circulation model. The best agreement with historical and proxy data is obtained using both forcings, each of which has a significant effect on global mean temperatures. However, their regional climate impacts in the Northern Hemisphere are quite different. While the short-term continental winter warming response to volcanism is well known, it is shown that due to opposing dynamical and radiative effects, the long-term (decadal mean) regional response is not significant compared to unforced variability for either the winter or the annual average. In contrast, the long-term regional response to solar forcing greatly exceeds unforced variability for both time averages, as the dynamical and radiative effects reinforce one another, and produces climate anomalies similar to those seen during the Little Ice Age. Thus, long-term regional changes during the preindustrial appear to have been dominated by solar forcing. 6. Conclusions: Volcanic forcing is important for both regional climate change on a year-to-year basis, and for long-term climate change on a global scale. It appears unlikely to induce sustained regional climate changes that exceed unforced variability, however. In contrast, solar forcing creates long-term regional climate changes that are greater than unforced variability, and which resemble those seen in proxy-based reconstructions of historical temperature change during the Maunder Minimum. The regional anomalies result primarily from a forced shift in the AO.During the last several decades, there has been an apparent upward trend in the AO (Thompson and Wallace 1998). Solar forcing, however, has increased little if at all over this period, by less than 0.05 W m22 since the 1960s (the exact value depends upon the particular years chosen for the trend calculations). Such a small increase in irradiance would cause an AO enhancement of about 0.1 mb, much smaller than the apparent trend of 3 mb, which is more likely to be attributable to increases in greenhouse gases, and to a lesser extent, Arctic ozone depletion (Shindell et al. 2001b).Downward shifts in the AO are closely correlated with cold temperature extremes in Europe (Higgins et al. 2002; Thompson and Wallace 2001), consistent with the historical impression that the LIA in Europe was punctuated by short periods of extreme cold exceeding that seen in the multidecadal averages of proxy data shown here (Pfister 1995). The global mean Little IceAge signal can therefore be attributed to both volcanic and solar forcing, but while volcanic forcing may have played a major role in global-scale cooling, the much larger regional changes and probable changes in the frequency of extreme cold events were likely driven primarily by solar variability.Acknowledgments. Modeling of chemistryclimate interactions and stratospheric dynamics at GISS is supported by NASAs Atmospheric Chemistry Modeling and Analysis Program, while climate modeling is funded by the NASA Climate Program Office. GAS and DTS were also supported by NSF Grant ATM-00-02267. We thank M. Sato for providing the aerosol data, Scott Rutherford for assistance with analysis of the surface temperature reconstruction, David Rind for discussion, and the three anonymous reviewers for their comments. 
__label__SUPPORT  A major sulphur isotope event at c. 510 Ma: a possible anoxiaextinctionvolcanism connection during the EarlyMiddle Cambrian transition?  Abstract: Seven mass extinctions have occurred since the Cambrian explosion of animal life roughly 540 Ma. These biotic crises are from youngest to oldest: the CretaceousTertiary, TriassicJurassic, PermianTriassic, Late Permian (end-Guadalupian), Late Devonian, end-Ordovician and EarlyMiddle Cambrian events (Erwin, 2001; Hallam, 2005). Although bolide impacts are popularly believed to cause mass extinctions, global climate change associated with volcanism and ocean anoxia is increasingly regarded to be the common thread linking most times of extreme biotic crisis (Courtillot, 1999; Hallam, 2005). At least five of seven Phanerozoic mass extinctions occurred at the same time (within the resolution of current age dating) as the eruptions of five unusually large igneous provinces (Fig. 1). Major climate perturbations linked to lesser extinctions are also temporally coincident with large eruptive events, e.g. the end-Palaeocene thermal maximum (Rea et al., 1990). In all these cases, global warming is considered to have triggered ocean anoxia due to the lower solubility of oxygen at higher temperatures although the exact extinction mechanism is uncertain. Because ocean anoxia favours bacterial sulphate reduction, it can possibly be recognized in the geological record by higher pyrite burial rates and a related increase in marine sulphate dS (Strauss, 1999), which fluctuates in response to changing pyrite burial rates (Kampschulte and Strauss, 2004). The long residence time of sulphate in the oceans means that dS excursions generally express themselves over a 10 Myr time-frame (Kampschulte and Strauss, 2004). However, relatively abrupt 10 10 Myr excursions related to ocean anoxic events can be superimposed on long-term trends. Extremely sharp positive shifts in dS have been reported to follow known mass extinction events of the end-Permian and Late Devonian (end-Frasnian) (Holser, 1977; Kampschulte and Strauss, 2004). Additional sharp spikes in the seawater dS record occurred during the Cretaceous period and following the PalaeoceneEocene boundary (Paytan et al., 1999; Kampschulte and Strauss, 2004). Although most studies have used evaporite or barite sulphate to reconstruct seawater dS, this study uses francolite because francolite precipitation occurs near the sedimentseawater interface in less-restricted marine environments than those associated with evaporite deposits (Shields et al., 2004). Francolite is also relatively more robust with respect to postdepositional alteration than most other sulphate-bearing marine authigenic minerals. Previous isotopic studies of Neoproterozoic and Cambrian phosphorites (Shields et al., 1999, 2004) demonstrate that francolite dS results are consistent with data from contemporaneous evaporite minerals, provided that the effects of post-depositional alteration and the diagenetic environment of formation (Benmore et al., 1983) can be constrained. The combination of sulphate concentration and isotopic data can in theory be used to backstrip the effects of bacterial sulphate reduction on francolite dS (cf. Piper and Kolodny, 1987), thus permitting us to determine seawater dS and sulphate concentration beyond the resolution possible using most other approaches. We analysed 32 samples from the Monastery Creek Phosphorite Member in the Georgina Basin, Australia that were deposited during the early part of the Templetonian subdivision of the Middle Cambrian (508 505 Ma) (Gradstein et al., 2004). This level lies stratigraphically above EarlyMiddle Cambrian boundary ABSTRACT 
__label__SUPPORT  Assessing the impact of large volcanic eruptions of the last millennium (8501850 CE) on Australian rainfall regimes  Abstract: Explosive volcanism is an important natural climate forcing, impacting global surface temperatures and regional precipitation. Although previous studies have investigated aspects of the impact of tropical volcanism on various oceanatmosphere systems and regional climate regimes, volcanic eruptions remain a poorly understood climate forcing and climatic responses are not well constrained. In this study, volcanic eruptions are explored in particular reference to Australian precipitation, and both the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) and El NinoSouthern Oscillation (ENSO). Using nine realisations of the last millennium (LM) (8501850 CE) with different time-evolving forcing combinations, from the NASA GISS ModelE2-R, the impact of the six largest tropical volcanic eruptions of this period are investigated. Overall, we find that volcanic aerosol forcing increased the likelihood of El Nino and positive IOD conditions for up to four years following an eruption, and resulted in positive precipitation anomalies over north-west (NW) and south-east (SE) Australia. Larger atmospheric sulfate loading during larger volcanic eruptions coincided with more persistent positive IOD and El Nino conditions, enhanced positive precipitation anomalies over NW Australia, and dampened precipitation anomalies over SE Australia. 4 Discussion and conclusions: Our results suggest that the large-scale IOD and ENSO systems, and Australian rainfall regimes, were all impacted by large tropical eruptions of the last millennium.The DMI response simulated in the GISS ensemble following large eruptions is complimentary to previous research conducted by Cheung and Abram (2016) and Maher et al. (2015). The pIOD peak in year 1 (Fig. 4) is consistent with both studies, in which statistically significant pIOD conditions occurred from 6 months to 2 years after an eruption. Cheung and Abram (2016) also found a statistically significant negative condition immediately after eruption at year 0, however this was absent from both Maher et al.s (2015) results and the CR forcing category in this study. The 2G category does show a nIOD condition at year 0, but this is not believed to be a response to volcanic forcing as a similar nIOD condition can be seen at year 1. The abrupt shift to a negative condition at year 5 was not found in either Cheung and Abram (2016) or Maher et al. (2015)s results. Both studies found a gradual decrease in DMI from year 1 to years 3 to 4.www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/ Clim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018The smooth transition to a lower DMI following eruptions found by Cheung and Abram (2016) and Maher et al. (2015) contrasts with the abrupt change from a pIOD of approximately 0.13 at year 4, to an nIOD of 0.069 in the CR ensembles and 0.083 in the 2G ensemble at year 5 (Fig. 4). This inconsistency between studies could be due to the selection of eruptions analysed by each paper. Cheung and Abram (2016) included all eruptions from 850 to 2005 CE recorded on the IVI2 (Gao et al., 2008) in their analysis. While this encompasses all eruptions analysed here, it also included many smaller eruptions that would likely have dampened the climatic response a response that has been analysed in previous papers (Zambri and Robock, 2016). Maher et al. (2015) looked at the five largest eruptions from 1880 to present, of which the largest was Pinatubo (1991), which measured at 30.10 Tg globally on the IVI2 (Gao et al., 2008). In comparison, our research deals with eruptions of much larger atmospheric loading, ranging from 56.59 to 257.91 Tg.Therefore, the persistence of a high pIOD through to year 4 seen here may result from the larger mean atmospheric sulfate loading imposed. This theory is supported by the comparison between the Samalas and Huaynaptina (Fig. 5) eruptions. Our results showed that while both eruptions caused asignificant pIOD at year 1, the larger 1258 Samalas eruption alone persisted with a significant pIOD condition in following years. Further support can be gathered from the comparison between the 2G and CR ensemble means in Fig. 4. Years 03 show more extreme values in the 2G ensemble mean, while years 46 show similar values for both forcing categories. Maher et al. (2015) found a similar response, with the two largest eruptions analysed in the paper showing the largest and longest enduring pIOD anomalies. This suggests that larger mean atmospheric sulfate loading can cause not only more persistent, but also more extreme pIOD conditions.The phase and intensity of the IOD is known to be influenced by the Asian monsoon (Brown et al., 2009; Xiang et al., 2011), which means that the physical mechanisms driving the pIOD response to volcanic forcing in GISS likely stem from this relationship. In GISS, the Asian monsoon was suppressed by the anomalous north-easterly flow off the south-east coast of China in years 0 and +1 (Figs. 13, 14) generated by volcanic aerosols, and a decrease of convection over the warm pool, cause by El Nino-like anomalies in those same years (Fig. 3). These feedbacks caused a comparatively warmer WIO, generating a pIOD. The AsianClim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018 www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/monsoon suppression following volcanic eruptions was also noted by Stevenson et al. (2016).The NINO3.4 response found in this research supports previous studies by Adams et al. (2003), Mann et al. (2005), Emile-Geay et al. (2008), McGregor et al. (2010) and Maher et al. (2015), despite GISS modelling weaker SST anomalies than observations (Fig. 1a, b). Figure 6 shows a very promi-nent and persistent El Nino response in all 6 years following eruption, however it lacks the weaker La Nina-like state that was observed 36 years after eruption in these previous papers. Spatial maps of SST (Fig. 3), while dominated by the overall volcanic cooling, show an El Nino-like pattern in the eastern Pacific that is most visible in year 4, possibly driven by the anomalous winds off the western coast of Southwww.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/ Clim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018America in year +3 (Fig. 13); however it is also distinctive in years 0, 1, and 3. We can therefore conclude that El Ninolike anomalies were generated in the multi-ensemble mean response in years 06 following eruption by a uniform reduction in surface temperature, driven by a decrease in the surface heat flux; a response which was also observed by Mann et al. (2005) and Emile-Geay et al. (2008). It can furthermore be concluded that the intensification of the El Nino in year +4 was due to anomalous wind flow in year +3. Comparison of the Samalas and Huaynaptina (Fig. 7) eruptions also suggest that, similar to the DMI, the intensity and endurance of the ENSO response to volcanic forcing increases with increasing mean atmospheric sulfate loading. This once again supports the findings of Maher et al. (2015) that identified a similar pattern.The positive response of Australian precipitation to volcanic forcing as seen here (Figs. 8, 9 and 11) is in agreement with several papers that identified a precipitation surplus over Australia following large volcanic eruptions (Schneider et al., 2009; Joseph and Zeng, 2011). Our results suggest thatthe direct effect of volcanic aerosols on precipitation overrode the impact of the IOD and ENSO on Australian precipitation in the years following large tropical volcanic eruptions. Northwestern Australia (Fig. 9) showed larger positive precipitation anomalies between years 0 and 2 than southeastern Australia (Fig. 11) in the CR ensemble mean, and in years 0 and 2 in the 2G ensemble mean. This could be due to the positive precipitation anomalies that can be generated by combined El Nino and pIOD events in the NW Australian region (Meyers et al., 2007; Pepler et al., 2014), which enhance the precipitation surplus caused by volcanic aerosols.The varying response of NW Australia to the Samalas and Huaynaptina eruptions (Fig. 10) also supports the enhancement of the volcanically induced precipitation surplus by combined El Nino and pIOD events. The Samalas eruption was followed by strong and enduring El Nino and pIOD conditions for up to 4 years post volcanism, and showed larger positive precipitation anomalies from years 0 to 3 than the Huaynaptina eruption, that was accompanied by smaller, shorter lived El Nino and pIOD conditions. The precipitationClim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018 www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/surplus related to the Samalas eruption in NW and SE Australia also peaked earlier than Huaynaptina, which could be a response to the larger atmospheric sulfate loading. Interestingly, previous papers have not reported a relationship between atmospheric sulfate loading and the peak in precipitation response (Robock and Lui, 1994; Iles et al., 2013, 2015).The precipitation anomalies of SE Australia (Fig. 12) further support this theory. The response to the Huaynaptina eruption, while peaking later than Samalas, endured longer, and with larger positive anomalies. The effect of strong, combined El Nino and pIOD conditions on SE Australia is significant precipitation deficits (Meyers et al., 2007; Pepler et al., 2014), which could explain the negative precipitation anomalies that occur in the Samalas response from year 2 onwards. This combined influence of a strong El Nino and pIOD dampened the positive precipitation response generated by the atmospheric sulfate loading. It should be noted that the surprisingly large positive precipitation anomaly at year 1 for SE Australia is an indicator of the uncertainty of the post-eruption values; however the significance of this event can still be seen by the comparison of the volcanic ensembles to the None ensemble.We note that our study has provided an analysis of climatic response to a set of forcings in a single climate model, which may limit the precise interpretation of responses to eruptions. Overall, volcanic aerosols remain an understudied climatic forcing such that the timing, magnitude, and spatialfootprint of past eruptions remains uncertain (Colose et al., 2016). In addition to uncertainties around the fundamental physical forcings, limitations still exist in the implementation of volcanic eruptions in climate models (Colose et al., 2016; Zambri et al., 2017). For example, Colose et al. (2016) suggest that improvements in model representations of volcanic particle size may improve the accuracy of model simulations. Furthermore, LeGrande et al. (2016) note that the chemistry and composition of a volcanic plume affects its climatic impact, which requires realistic representation in climatic models. Overall, these limitations in modelling eruptions and the idealised approach adopted here may mean that impacts simulated do not precisely match those of the proxy record.In summary, this paper aimed to identify the impact of large, tropical volcanism on the ENSO, IOD, and Australian rainfall. Averaging over multiple major eruptions and multiple simulations was undertaken to reduce the noise associated with the analysis of single volcanic eruptions, as seen by the 90th and 10th percentiles in Figs. 5, 7, 10, and 12. Results showed an El Nino and pIOD response in the immediate years following eruption, accompanied by positive precipitation anomalies over SE and NW Australia. The positive precipitation anomalies suggest that volcanic aerosol cooling dominates the precipitation response, rather than the effect of ENSO or IOD, despite aerosols also proving to be an important influence on these large-scale modes. Although this study focused on Australian rainfall regimes and its main cli-www.clim-past.net/14/811/2018/ Clim. Past, 14, 811824, 2018matic drivers, this approach can be applied for exploring the impact of time evolving forcings, such as volcanism, in other regions.Data availability. All underlying research data is available on the CMIP5 archive, bar the water isotopes (https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/ search/cmip5/, last access: 9 June 2018).Competing interests. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Acknowledgements. We thank NASA GISS for institutional support. Sophie C. Lewis is funded through the Australian Research Council (ARC) DECRA Fellowship (DE160100092) and additional funding is provided through the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science (CE110001028). We also thank the NASA MAP programme for the continued support of Allegra N. LeGrande and Ron L. Miller Resources supporting this work were provided by the NASA High-End Computing (HEC) Program through the NASA Center for Climate Simulation (NCCS) at Goddard Space Flight Center.Edited by: Stefan Bronnimann Reviewed by: two anonymous referees 
__label__SUPPORT  Perturbations in the carbon cycle during the Carnian Humid Episode: carbonate carbon isotope records from southwestern China and northern Oman  Abstract: The Carnian Humid Episode is an interval of prominent climatic changes in the Late Triassic. We studied the carbon isotope (C) geochemistry of carbonates from sections in southwestern China and northern Oman. C records from the Yongyue section (western Guizhou, South China) show a progressive positive shift from 1.4 to 2.8 in the early to middle Julian 1 substage. This positive trend is followed by a swift negative shift of c. 4.2 from 2.8 to1.4 in the Julian 2 substage. C from theWadiMayhah section (northern Oman) shows a positive shift from 2.2 to 2.8 in the Julian 1 substage, followed by a negative shift of c. 3.2 from 2.8 to 0.3 in the Julian 2 substage. The C records from the two study sections generally correlate well with each other as well as with published records, pointing to a considerable input of isotopically light carbon starting in the late Julian 1 substage. Such a large amount of light carbon probably derived from direct degassing and the sedimentsill contact metamorphism of the Panthalassan Wrangellia Large Igneous Province and contemporary Tethyan volcanism. The voluminous volcanogenic greenhouse gases probably contributed to the warming pulse in the middle Carnian. Thus the drywet climatic transition during the Carnian Humid Episode is best interpreted as a warm climate-driven intensification of the activities of the atmospheric circulation and hydrological cycle. Received 31 December 2017; revised 27 July 2018; accepted 9 August 2018 First introduced as the Carnian Pluvial Event by Simms & Ruffell (1989), the Carnian Humid Episode (CHE, following the latest term of Ruffell et al. 2015) represents an interval of major climatic changes in the Triassic Period, but remains the least understood. The CHE is characterized by a transient phase (<1 myr) of increased humidity in an otherwise long-lasting arid climate (Kozur & Bachmann 2010; Preto et al. 2010; Chatalov 2017; Lopez-Gomez et al. 2017). The sudden climatic shift caused significant environmental and ecological changes, which are documented in both sedimentary and fossil records. On land, a clear shift in floral assemblages from xerophytes to hygrophytes is seen in the late Julian substage (Roghi et al. 2010;Mueller et al. 2016a, b), possibly promoting the changeovers in terrestrial tetrapods (Benton 1986, 1994; Bernardi et al. 2018). Peat-forming environments were steadily established in both North America and western Europe (Olsen 1988; Pott et al. 2008), representing their first occurrences in equatorial latitudes after the c. 15 myr coal gap from the endPermian mass extinction (Retallack et al. 1996). In the oceans, the drywet climatic transition caused an increase in siliciclastic influx to the epicontinental seas (Stefani et al. 2010; Arche & LopezGomez 2014). Increased turbidity probably suppressed carbonate production, resulting in the demise of platforms and reef ecosystems in the western Tethys (Flugel & Senowbari-Daryan 2001; Hornung et al. 2007a; Preto et al. 2010). In the eastern Tethys (SW China), the CHE is manifested by the development of extensive oxygendepleted facies on top of the fossiliferous platform and slope to basin carbonates (Sun et al. 2016). The deposition of black shales in the region was closely associated with anoxia and the development of local foreland basins on top of the former platform (Enos et al. 2006). Notable victims of the CHE in marine realms include platform and reef dwellers, such as encrinid crinoids, forams and scallops, as well as casualties in nektonic groups such as conodonts and ammonoids (Simms et al. 1994; Hornung et al. 2007a; Rigo et al. 2007; BouDagher-Fadel 2008; Chen et al. 2016). Losses on land are not yet fully quantified. Perturbations in the carbon cycle often coincided with bio-crisis intervals in the geological past, mirroring significant environmental changes. The carbon isotope ratio (C) of marine carbonates traces the carbon isotope composition of the dissolved inorganic carbon pool in the ocean and thus records a subtle equilibrium of carbon input (e.g. riverine carbon input and volcanic degassing) and carbon burial (e.g. carbonate and organic carbon) (Sharp 2017). Primary producers (i.e. phytoplankton and plants) preferentially utilize C, synthesizing isotopically light organic matter. The organic matter rains down from the photic zone to the seafloor and might be either re-oxidized or buried with sediments (Hayes et al. 1999). Positive C excursions are generally interpreted as evidence for enhanced burial of organic carbon, either due to increases in primary productivity in the euphotic zone, oxygen deficiency in the water column, or both at the same time (Saltzman & Thomas 2012). Negative C excursions are caused by an increased input of isotopically light carbon from, for example, the remineralization of organic carbon, volcanism and contact metamorphism. As the CHE coincided with voluminous eruptions of theWrangellia flood basalt, the negative C excursion during the CHE has been linked to the release of volcanogenic carbon (Dal Corso et al. 2012;Mueller et al. 2016b; Miller et al. 2017). The carbonate production crisis and sudden siliciclastic fluxes during the CHE generated a carbonate gap in large areas in both western Tethys and the peri-Gondwana margins (Hornung et al. 2018 The Author(s). Published by The Geological Society of London. All rights reserved. For permissions: http://www.geolsoc.org.uk/permissions. Publishing disclaimer: www.geolsoc.org.uk/pub_ethics Thematic set: The Mid-Carnian Episode Journal of the Geological Society Published online September 12, 2018 https://doi.org/10.1144/jgs2017-170 | Vol. 176 | 2019 | pp. 167177 Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/jgs/article-pdf/176/1/167/4607450/jgs2017-170.pdf by University of Arizona user on 20 February 2019 2007a, b). Only a small number of Ccarb studies have been carried out through (or partially through) the CHE interval (Keim et al. 2006; Hornung et al. 2007b; Dal Corso et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2016). Low total organic carbon contents and potential admixtures of terrestrial organic carbon in the siliciclastic rocks in different basins hinder the interpretation of Corg on the global scale (Dal Corso et al. 2015; Mueller et al. 2016a). All sedimentary rocks are subject to diagenetic alteration. Thus sedimentary C records should be interpreted with prudence, especially in case of shallow water carbonates formed in situ on platforms. The original isotopic signatures can be substantially influenced by meteoritic diagenesis, a higher proportion of metastable aragonite relative to calcite and the local remineralization of organic matter (Patterson & Walter 1994; Immenhauser et al. 2003; Swart & Eberli 2005). Deeper water carbonates (e.g. slopes and ramps) are less prone to diagenetic overprinting and may preserve primary Ccarb values, especially if they stabilized in a closed diagenetic system (Swart 2008). We carried out Ccarb analyses on carbonates from a carbonate ramp setting in South China (the eastern Palaeotethys) and a periplatform deeper basin setting in Oman (the southern margin of the western Neotethys). The new data show a comparable negative shift in Ccarb at the beginning of the CHE, pointing to an at least Tethyan-wide, if not global, disturbance in the global carbon cycle. Conclusions: The carbon isotope composition of carbonates from the Yongyue section (China) in the eastern Palaeotethys and the Wadi Mayhah section (Oman) in the southern Neotethys have been measured. Although the study sections were situated in different palaeogeographical settings, both show generally consistent patterns of 13Ccarb. The comparable negative 13Ccarb excursion suggests that the instability of the carbon cycle during the CHEwas Tethyan-wideand most likely a global phenomenon. The input of isotopically light carbon can be related to volcanic degassing and thermogenic heating of organic-rich sediments as a consequence of the Wrangellia LIP and other contemporary volcanic activities. The drywet transition during the CHE thus coincided with a large input of carbon into the atmosphere and a shift in sedimentation from (cherty) carbonates to shales in study areas, and was most probably due to the intensification of the hydrological cycle triggered by volcanism-induced global warming.Acknowledgements This is a contribution to Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Science Foundation) Research Unit TERSANE (FOR 2332: Temperature-related stressors as a unifying principle in ancient extinctions; Project Jo 219/15). S.R. and L.K. conducted fieldwork in Oman under authorization of the Public Authority for Mining, Sultanate of Oman. The authors thank D. Lutz and L.N. Wang for laboratory and field assistance. Comments from Editor J. Dal Corso and two reviewers significantly improved this paper.Funding The National Key R&D Program of China (grant no. 2016YFA0601100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 41602026, 41821001) financially supported this study. S.R. and L. K. were sponsored by the Austrian National Committee for IGCP (IGCP630).Correction notice Someminor spelling mistakes as well as the spelling of L. Krystyn has been corrected following a submission error.Scientific editing by Jacopo Dal Corso 
__label__SUPPORT  The ZiwayShala lake basin system, Main Ethiopian Rift: Influence of volcanism, tectonics, and climatic forcing on basin formation and sedimentation  Abstract: In the central sector of the Main Ethiopian Rift, the ZiwayShala lake basin system includes four present-day residual lakes, from north to south, lakes Ziway, Langano, Abijata, and Shala. This region of East Africa is under the influence of the Intertropical Convergence Zone seasonal migration. Thus it has been designated as a potential core site by the ERICA Project (Environmental Research for Intertropical Climate in Africa). The four lakes have been subjected to strong changes in water level and water salinity at least during the Late Pleistocene. The purpose of this study is to produce a model of basin formation and sediment accumulation for this system of lakes, in order to separate the effects of climatic change from environmental variations induced by local or regional factors such as volcano-tectonic forcings. In addition to an exhaustive synthesis of available data, various investigations have been used to develop this model: 3D remote sensing, high-resolution seismics, coring, and structural, sedimentological, and hydrological field studies. New AMS radiocarbon dating helped to refine the pre-existing stratigraphic framework for this region, and basin age estimations were calculated using mean sediment accumulation rates. The history of the ZiwayShala lake basin system has been reconstructed from Corresponding author. Fax: C33-298498749; E-mail: tiercelin@univ-brest.fr 1 Present address: Elf Petroleum Norge AS, Research and Development Department, Dusavik, P.O. Box 168N, 4001 Stavanger, Norway. 0031-0182/99/$ see front matter 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S 0 0 3 1 0 1 8 2 ( 9 8 ) 0 0 2 2 0 X 136 C. Le Turdu et al. / Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 150 (1999) 135177 the Late PlioceneEarly Pleistocene period (106 yr), mainly characterized by catastrophic explosive volcanic eruptions. The early-middle PleistoceneLate Pleistocene period (1010 yr) was marked by a regional volcano-tectonic paroxysm, resulting in major changes in the morphology of the area, with the formation of the Abijata, Ziway and Shala lake basins. From 340.20 Ma, the ZiwayShala basin history is marked by the eastward migration of volcano-tectonic activity, resulting in the development of the youngest basin of the ZiwayShala system, the Langano Basin. The joint history of sedimentation in the Ziway, Langano, Abijata, and Shala lake basins started during the early-Late Pleistocene period (101104 yr) and is characterized from this period up to the present-day by a series of climatically controlled rises and falls of lake level. 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 6. Conclusions: This study of the ZiwayShala lake basin system of the MER provides an evolutionary model that can be applied to other intracontinental rift systems where initial rift floor segmentation is dominated by major explosive volcanism, in contrast with tectonics-dominated rift basins.At the macro-architectural scale (106 yr), the Late PlioceneEarly Pleistocene morphology of the ZiwayShala region directly relates to catastrophic explosive volcanic eruptions correlated with major caldera collapse (Munesa and Gademotta calderas). The history of the lake basin system started as a result of a combination of large (30 km diameter?) pre-existing caldera depressions.At the meso-architectural scale (104106 yr), fault deformation and migration linked to the tectonic structuration of the WFB results in controlling the architectural pattern of the basin and drainage system. Successive depressions caused by the subsidence of crustal blocks combined with reliefs formed by magma effusion during a new paroxysmic explosive volcanic phase, the whole being associated with graben-like downfaulting related to the development of the Wonji Fault Belt, resulted in less than 105 yr in a new complex rift floor morphology: to the174 C. Le Turdu et al. / Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 150 (1999) 135177west, development of the Abijata Main Basin superimposed to the pre-existing MunesaGademotta calderas; to the north-northeast, development of the Ziway Basin. Lateral migration of volcano-tectonic activity resulted later in the diachronous formation of two opposite half-grabens, the Abijata Main Basin to the west, and the Langano Basin to the east, separated by the Katlo Horst.Finally, at a micro-architectural scale (101104 yr), the climate signal appeared to be more pronounced as tectonic effects have waned. Climatic fluctuations at regional or global scale, linked to the monsoon effects, and possibly influenced at a millennial scale by the regional explosive volcanism, caused river regime change and major baselevel changes controlling drainage basin area and shape, resulting in quick-alternating high- and lowlake morphologies. Minor tectonic movements appeared to be concentrated in the youngest Langano Basin, possibly correlated with volcanic activity of Alutu, thus defining the present-day Ethiopian Rift active axis. 
__label__SUPPORT  High-resolution carbon isotope records of the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event (Early Jurassic) from North America and implications for the global drivers of the Toarcian carbon cycle  Abstract: a Department of Geosciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA b Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA c Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, V6T 1Z4, Canada d Department of Geosciences, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49006, USA e Department of Earth Sciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK f Department of Geological Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA g Geological Survey of Canada, Calgary, Alberta T2L 2A7, Canada 6. Conclusions: The T-OAE CIE and the high-frequency fluctuations within it have now been documented from multiple oceanic basins spanning the globe. This is consistent with the suggestion that they reflect global perturbations to the carbon cycle triggered by volcanism associated with the emplacement of the KarooFerrar LIP and subsequent biogeochemical feedbacks (e.g., methane clathrate releases or terrestrial methanogenesis). This finding also further confirms the utility of the overall T-OAE CIE as a global chemostratigraphic marker. Additionally, we suggest that increased terrestrial methanogenesis, which would have been an important positive feedback to the initial warming and increased precipitation caused by the emplacement of the KarooFerrar LIP, played an important role in the Toarcian carbon cycle. Importantly, any additional flux of carbon from terrestrial environments to the oceanatmosphere system would decrease the carbon flux needed from other potential sources to generate the broader T-OAE CIE and small-scale CIEs within it. Future studies will further elucidate the role of the terrestrial carbon cycle in the Toarcian climatic change.A better understanding of the T-OAE record may serve to inform models of other events triggered by rapid injections of greenhouse gases, such as the PETM. While these two events were separated by roughly 130 million years and had significantly different Earth system boundary conditions, the resulting environmental change and ecological deterioration were broadly similar. As our planet experiences another significant perturbation to the global carbon cycle and climatic warming, the record of environmental change recorded during these geologic events represents an invaluable archive for models of future long-term climate and oceanographic change. 
__label__SUPPORT  Early Eocene climatic, volcanic, and biotic events in the northwestern Tethyan Untersberg section, Austria  Abstract: The 40 m thick Untersberg section (Salzburg, Austria) of the Northern Calcareous Alps comprises the Palaeocene Eocene transition and spans the upper part of calcareous nannoplankton zone NP9 and the lower part of zone NP10 (subzone NP10a). These zones are equivalent to planktonic foraminifera zone P5 and the lower part of zone P6 (sub-zone P6a). The succession was deposited in a lower bathyal slope environment at a palaeodepth of about 2000 m. Within the dominantly marlstone succession, a 5.5-m-thick intercalation of red and green claystone and marly claystone represents the global negative carbon isotope excursion (CIE) which is used to recognize the PalaeoceneEocene boundary. The CIE was associated with a shallowing of the calcite compensation depth by at least 1 km. Throughout the section, clay mineral assemblages are dominated by smectite, indicating a seasonal climate with alternating wet and dry conditions. A 49% increase in detrital quartz and feldspar within the CIE-interval suggests enhanced continental run-off. This was probably the result of the establishment of a monsoonal setting, in which vegetation was sparse, while periodic high rainfall caused pronounced sediment transport. The increased terrestrially derived input is associated with abundant radiolarian casts indicating high primary productivity. This suggests that seasonal nutrient pulses resulting from intensified precipitation during the wet season have caused high surface-water fertility. The benthic foraminifera faunas of the samples rich in siliceous plankton are strongly dominated by Glomospira spp., Nuttalides truempyii, Abyssamina poagi, Anomalinoides praeacutus, Anomalinoides nobilis, and Oridorsalis spp. We assume that the GlomospiraNuttalides fauna consists of opportunistic species which quickly react to seasonally varying amounts of food. The calcareous nannoplankton assemblage of the CIE-interval is characterized by the first occurrences of the genus Rhomboaster and of Discoaster araneus and Discoaster mahmoudii, whereas Scapholithus apertus become extinct at the PalaeoceneEocene boundary. Within nannoplankton sub-zone NP10a, a series of primarily basaltic ashes give evidence for a major episode of explosive volcanism which can be correlated with the positive ash-series of the Fur-Formation in northern Denmark. The wide 5. Conclusion: In the northwestern Tethys, abundant siliceous plankton indicate high nutrient levels in oceanic surface waters in the basal Eocene. A coeval increase in both sedimentation rates and the amounts of terrestrially derived quartz and feldspar suggests that this high primary productivity was the result of enhanced continental run-off. It is assumed that the establishment of a pronounced monsoonal climate caused this increase in continental erosion.Frequent ash-layers indicate that intense explosive volcanism was another important environmental factor in the early Eocene. The biostratigraphical and geochemical correspondence of these tephras with ashes from the North Sea Basin suggests that these pyroclastic deposits are related to the continental breakup of Europe and Greenland. The distance the tephras in the northwestern Tethyan sections were dispersed from their proposed magmatic source in the North Atlantic igneous province (ca. 4000 km) indicates that the eruptions were extremely powerful and emitted large volumes of ash and gases into the lower stratosphere. It can be assumed that these eruptions greatly affected the radiation of the sun and, therefore, caused a decrease of surface temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere. As basaltic eruptions require watermagma interaction, the onset of eruptive activity was probably an effect of the emergence of part of the North Atlantic igneous province above sea level. The tephra layers are restricted to sub-zone NP10a and vanish at the top of this sub-zone. The transgression of the London clay and the Ieper clay in the North Sea basin was an effect of a pronounced sea-level rise at the base of sub-zone NP10b (Aubry, 1996; Knox, 1998). The termination of basaltic eruptions at that stratigraphic level suggests that the rising sea level caused the drowning of the volcanic source area.H. Egger et al. / Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 217 (2005) 243264262 
__label__SUPPORT  Evidence for a volcanic cooling signal in a 335year coral record from New Caledonia  Abstract: Although volcanic cooling events have been detected in tree ring records, their occurrence in marine records has received much less attention. Herein we report results from a 335-year oxygen isotope record (1657-1992) from a New Caledonia coral indicating that as many as 16 interannual-scale cooling events occur within 1 year of a volcanic eruption as determined by ice core records. There are also pentadal/decadal-scale cooling events beginning in 1675, 1813, and 1903 that immediately postdate volcanic eruptions. However, the interannual correspondences are complicated by the fact that some of the cooling events also coincide with E1 Nifios, which cause cooling in this part of the western South Pacific. If our conclusions are substantiated by further work, occurrence of distinct volcanic cooling signals may enable refinement of coral chronologies by use of the event stratigraphic approach, with the most promising correlation horizons being associated with the following eruptions: 1808 (Unknown), 1813-1821 (several eruptions), 1835 (Coseguina), 1883 (Krakatau), and possibly 1963 (Agung). 
__label__SUPPORT  Earth dynamics and climate changes La dynamique terrestre et les modifications climatiques  Abstract: The evolution of the Earths climate over geological time is now relatively well known. Conversely, the causes and feedback mechanisms involved in these climatic changes are still not well determined. At geological timescales, two factors play a prevailing role: plate tectonics and the chemical composition of the atmosphere. Their climatic effects will be examined using palaeoclimatic indicators as well as results of climate models. I focus primarily on the influence of continental drift on warm and cold climatic episodes. The consequences of peculiar land sea distributions (amalgamation/dispersal of continental blocks) are discussed. Plate tectonics also drive sea level changes as well as mountain uplift. Marine transgressions during the MidCretaceous favoured warmth within the interiors of continents, although their effect could be very different according to the season. Mountain uplift is also an important factor, which is able to alter climate at large spatial scales. Experiments relative to climatic sensitivity to the elevation of the Appalachians during the Late Permian are discussed. To affect the whole Earth, the chemical composition of the atmosphere appears to be a more efficient forcing factor. The carbon dioxide driven by the longterm carbon cycle has influenced the global climate. Geochemical modelling simulates more or less accurately the long-term evolution of pCO2, which corresponds roughly to the icehouse/greenhouse climatic oscillations. However, the uncertainties on pCO2 are still important because different parameters involved in the long-term carbon cycle (degassing rate, chemical weathering of silicates, burial of organic matter) are not well constrained throughout the past. The chemical composition of the atmosphere is also altered by the emissions of modern volcanic eruptions leading to weak global cooling. The influence of large flood basalt provinces on climate is not yet known well enough; this volcanism may have released huge amounts of SO2 as well as CO2. At last, the chemical composition of the atmosphere may have been altered by the release of methane in response to the dissociation of gas hydrates. This scenario has been proposed to explain the abrupt warming during the Late Palaeocene. 2003 Academie des sciences/Editions scientifiques et medicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved. 8. Conclusion: Understanding the Earths climate history over geologic time-scales remains a challenge, despite the huge amount of data accumulated over a century and the use of numerical models since two decades. The first-order climate history over the Phanerozoic, which shows a succession of warmer and colder global periods, is now relatively well known. However, we are still unable to reproduce the long-term trend. Different forcing factors, most of them resulting from internal Earths processes, have been proposed to account for climate evolution over geologic timescales. Two of them are of primary importance, plate tectonics and greenhouse gases, both being themselves possibly in part causally related.The past position of continents is accurately known for the past 200 Ma, but progress is still required for older periods. Climate modelling has shown that this factor cannot account alone for global long-term climate changes. Indeed, the location of continents cannot explain the extreme warmth in the Mid-Cretaceous or the short duration of the Ordovician ice age. The impact of plate configurations on climate may have evolved in the past. Numerical experiments reveal that the Late Permian climate was largely driven by a peculiar palaeogeographic configuration (Pangea supercontinent). All continents are assembled as a single entity, deeply reducing the effect of oceanic circulation on the climatic system. Most recently, a combination of break-up of the equatorial supercontinent of Rodinia, emission of a huge flood basalt and enhanced weathering has been suggested as a possible cause for the 700-Ma Proterozoic Snowball Earth (Godderis et al., in review). Conversely, the rise of sea level driven by plate tectonics affects the landsea dis-tribution and both alter atmospheric and oceanic circulations. Climate modelling reveals that marine transgression causes a warming within the interiors of continents. The Mid-Cretaceous warmth within the interiors of continents could be explained by such a mechanism. The coupled effect of plate tectonics and sealevel variations has led to the opening and closure of marine gateways. The effects of marine gateways on climate vary drastically with respect to their location, width and depth. In the case of closure of the Isthmus of Panama, as well as of the closure of Indonesian seaway, changes in oceanic and atmospheric circulation may likely have contributed to large-scale climate changes. Finally, the elevation of mountain ranges such as the Appalachians during the Late Palaeozoic or the Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau during the Late Cainozoic appears to be an important forcing factor, which alters atmospheric circulation and therefore climate at the continental scale.To influence the climate on a global scale, changes in atmospheric chemical composition, and especially CO2 fluctuations appear to be a more efficient mechanism. Fluctuations of pCO2 deduced from geochemical models simulate roughly long-term climate evolution. An elevated pCO2 is required to partly explain the warmth of the Mid-Cretaceous. The evolutions of sources and sinks of carbon as well as fluxes between carbon reservoirs have to be better constrained over long-term timescales. The impact of silicate weathering on climate has been suggested as a potential mechanism to balance the input of CO2 from volcanoes (mid-ocean ridges, arc- and plume-type volcanism) and other sources. The Late-Cainozoic global cooling has been ascribed to an increase in silicate weathering resulting from the Himalayan uplift. However, the uptake of CO2 by sedimentary burial of organic matter could have been a more efficient mechanism, because of the high denudation rate during the rise of the Himalayas. The influence of weathering of volcanic rocks may have been significantly underestimated.Volcanic eruptions are a major potential candidate for climate change on short timescales, resulting from the injection of aerosols such as SO2 in the atmosphere. However, the climatic effects of recent volcanic eruptions do not exceed several years. The influence of large flood basalts on climate remains to be better studied. The amounts of SO2 and CO2 must be known more accurately, as well as eruptivefluxes during eruptions of single lava flows. Most recently, the emission of methane resulting from the dissociation of gas hydrates has been proposed to explain an extreme warm episode in the Late Palaeocene, as well as a negative excursion of 13C. The contribution of the latter mechanism on long-term climate evolution is still unknown.Because of the complexity of both the climatic system and climate changes, there is no single factor that can explain all of the Earths climatic evolution. We must improve our understanding of climate evolution, of the climatic system, as well as the forcing factors in order to better reconstruct the history of the Earths climate. 
__label__SUPPORT  Sulfate source inventories from a Svalbard ice core record spanning the Industrial Revolution  Abstract: [1] The 800-year sulfate record from Lomonosovfonna was analyzed by a novel multiple linear regression algorithm that attempts to explain sulfate variability in terms of other chemical species measured in the core and sulfur emission inventories. We use three statistical approaches to determine sulfate sources. We examine trends using singular spectrum analysis with confidence intervals, finding clear evidence that anthropogenic sources are important but not dominant; we use cross-wavelet coherence to examine significant multidecadal covariance in terrestrial sulfate; but our main tool is multiple regression analysis of the sulfate dependency on other ions and anthropogenic emission inventories. Models are fitted in a moving time window of typically 50 years length, explaining 80% of the sulfate variance. A suite of model predictors are examined, and the variation in relative magnitudes of the model coefficients along the core can be used to infer variations in the strength of various sulfate sources. We observe large changes in sulfate sources at the end of the Little Ice Age associated with changes in Barents Sea marine productivity, changes in North Atlantic sulfate input and a long-lasting period of disturbance caused by the large Laki volcanic eruption. Modeling sulfur emission inventories shows that western Europe contributes about 15% of the sulfate budget, with essentially no input from other regions, in contrast with predictions from global circulation models incorporating sulfur chemistry. Multidecadal cycles are mainly confined to the Little Ice Age and most likely associated with increased storminess and enhanced deposition of both marine aerosol and biogenic sulfate from the Atlantic Ocean. The model residuals do not show a normal distribution but display very large spikes. Unexpectedly, those significant at the 99% level can be closely matched to major volcanic eruptions using independent dating methods. The 20th century sulfate in the core is inventoried as sea salt (15%), terrestrial (10%), volcanic (510%), western European anthropogenic (1025%), Barents Sea biogenic (2040%), and Atlantic biogenic (1015%). 5. Summary and Conclusions: [36] Multiple linear regression modeling of the sulfate profile unexpectedly showed that the best predictors were nitrate and magnesium. These seem to represent acid and neutral components of sulfate, most likely because acids are colocated in the ice and magnesium is sourced from both sea salt and terrestrial sources. Moore et al. [2005a] show that postdepositional percolation is the primary agent for determining the location of species in the ice core, on shortdistance scales corresponding to a few annual layers of accumulation. Therefore it is most likely that it is postdepositional coelution of ions that results in the relationships seen in the MLR models. For this reason we need to useaNote the Laki 1783 signal was removed before modeling. bKekonen et al. [2005]. cPohjola et al. [2002b]. dSiebert and Simkin [20022005]. VEI is the volcanic explosivity index.D15307 MOORE ET AL.: SULFATE SOURCES IN A SVALBARD ICE CORE10 of 13D15307many more models than just the best fitting MLR model to understand the sulfate budget in the ice core. The expected predictors, salt, MSA, calcium are useful conceptually as we know that they are representative of particular sources. [37] Percolation longer than the smoothing window would simply introduce a smoothing to the MLR model residuals, but we do not see such an effect. A residual peak is about the length of the smoothing window (except deep in the core, such as the 1259 event), as would be expected of volcanic events affected by slow diffusion processes. This is good evidence that the assumptions made concerning the degree of smoothing due to percolation are sufficiently conservative. In effect we have verified a preservation model that suggests that the net effect of dating and percolation smoothing of the ion records is a limiting resolution of 3 years. Therefore there is no advantage is to be gained in fitting the ice core record to external emission inventories by using a percolation correcting model to recover the original ion concentrations. [38] Sea-salt sulfate amounts to about 18% of the mean post-1918 sulfate budget of about 280 ppb or 5.8 meq L 1. Calcium is almost entirely of non-sea-salt origin in the Lomonosovfonna core, and model 3 in Table 1 suggests that it contributes about 10% of the sulfate budget. Kekonen et al. [2005a] show that the dominant 2530-year band covariation of calcium with sulfate has an amplitude of about 1 meq L 1 (about 50 ppb of SO42 ), suggesting that the terrestrial input is largely modulated by this periodicity. So a terrestrial source of sulfate primarily deposited with calcium contributes on average about 10% of the post-1918 sulfate budget. Long-period (multidecadal) cycles were relatively strong during the LIA, but apparently related only to the magnesium predictor of sulfate, not with the nitrate predictor. This can be explained by increased storminess and wind speeds in the LIA bringing both sea-salt aerosol and Atlantic biogenic sulfate to the ice cap. [39] MSA as a predictor of sulfate is most likely due to both having a common DMS source. This must be mostly local as the dramatic change in the MSA ion profiles at the end of LIA was very likely caused by the sea ice edge moving north. However, biogenic acidic sulfate coming from production in the Atlantic may also be carried to Lomonosovfonna with storms [Hara et al., 1997]. This is a viable mechanism as biogenic production in the Atlantic starts much earlier in the spring, close to the peak storm season, and is much greater than in the Barents Sea [Lancelot and Wassmann, 1994]. From Figure 4c it can be seen that the coefficient of MSA increases dramatically at the end of the LIA. The fraction of sulfate coming from Barents Sea DMS emission should be given by the proportion of sulfate predicted by MSA in an appropriate MLRmodel. Table 1, model 5 is one such model where we interpret the MSA contribution to represent local Barents Sea production, magnesium represents the sea salt, terrestrial and Atlantic acid contribution, while anthropogenic and other acidic sources are represented by western European emissions and nitrate. The nitrate coefficient is not significant in the model, but we include it as we wish to show that even allowing all plausible acidic components, magnesium still overrepresents sulfate. Magnesium accounts for 40% of sulfate, of which 1520% is from sea salt and 10% from terrestrial sources, leaving 1015% as the Atlantic biogenic sulfate contribution. MSA represents about 30%, similar modeling of the LIA shows only 20% sulfate from MSA. The much reduced concentrations of MSA in post-LIA ice imply that the MSA/nss SO42branching ratio has changed by a much larger amount: to favor H2SO4 production over MSA. [40] Anthropogenic sulfate seems to account for about 15% of the total sulfate since 1918 and appears to have a western European source. Local sources, eastern Europe, and North America make no significant contribution. GotoAzuma and Koerner [2001], compare a sulfate record extending to the 1930s from Snfonnafjella in Svalbard with sulfur emissions from Eurasia and North America, qualitatively finding emissions from Eurasia match the trend in SO42 better than those from North America. This is consistent with our findings, though as we have separated the western and eastern European contributions we see no good fits between eastern sources and SO42 either in trends or in detailed three-point sample analysis. This is unexpected from GCMs incorporating sulfur chemical process [Christensen, 1997] and may possibly be explained by the altitude of Lomonosovfonna; though it is relatively low, it is above the inversion layer in contrast with all the monitoring stations collecting sulfur aerosol. [41] Thus summing up the various lines of evidence, the typical 20th century sulfate budget appears to be composed as in Table 3. Probably the weakest estimate is for the Atlantic biogenic contribution which is based on inferences from the excess magnesium contribution. Best guesses for the other contributions would be sea salt: 18% (mean seawater ratio); western European emissions: 18% (Table 1, model 3); terrestrial dust: 10% (decadal covariability); Barents sea biogenic: 30% (arguments above); volcanic + measurement error: 15% (MLR variance accounted for), which sums to 91%. This leaves about 10% unexplained which is consistent with the estimate for Atlantic biogenic activity in Table 3. [42] One surprising finding is the enormously long-lasting impact of the Laki volcanic event. Kekonen et al. [2005b] show that the signal affects temperatures for several yearsD15307 MOORE ET AL.: SULFATE SOURCES IN A SVALBARD ICE CORE11 of 13D15307after the sulfate deposition itself, but here we remove that signal prior to any modeling. We observe that the impact is clearly felt for some time after the event by the sudden switch from magnesium to nitrate as most important predictor, the only similar switch occurring at the end of the LIA (Figure 4b). Further, the volcanic interpretation in Table 2 suggests that the accumulation rate was anomalously low in the period around Laki. So either the Laki eruption occurred during an anomalous period, or that its influence was more pervasive in the chemistry of the atmosphere and possibly the circulation patterns of both oceans and atmosphere than previously realized. [43] It seems clear that the largest volcanic eruption signals originate in Iceland or the Far East: We see no conclusive signals from North America. This contrasts with signals seen in Greenland where transport paths over the pole from Alaska seem much more common than for Svalbard. Despite this natural pollution pathway, we see no evidence for eastern European or Asian anthropogenic sulfur, perhaps because those are low-altitude signals rather than the large volcanic events that inject sulfur to the high troposphere or stratosphere.[44] Acknowledgments. The Finnish Forest Research Institute Research Station, Rovaniemi, provided cold and clean room facilities. The drilling of the Lomonosovfonna 1997 ice core was financed by the Norwegian Polar Institute and IMAU, Utrecht University. The Finnish Academy Figare project and the Thule Institute financed the chemical and mathematical analysis. We also thank all the field participants over the many seasons, our editor John Austin, and three anonymous referees for their comments. 
__label__SUPPORT  Voluminous silicic eruptions during late Permian Emeishan igneous province and link to climate cooling Introduction: Basaltic eruptions associated with large igneous provinces (LIPs) have been widely discussed to induce climate warming via CO2 degassing or cooling by sulfur gas emission (e.g., Jolley and Widdowson, 2005; Mussard et al., 2014; Self et al., 2006, 2014; Zhang et al., 2013). However the climatic impact of LIP silicic volcanism is often overlooked even though it may constitute a substantial component of many LIPs (Bryan et al., 2002) and have a potential linkage with regional or hemispheric climate cooling via delivering sulfur gases and ash into the upper atmosphere (Scaillet and Macdonald, 2006). This is mainly because of the poor preservation of such volcanic activity due to erosion, especially for pre-Mesozoic provinces (Bryan et al., 2002). In the late Permian Emeishan volcanic province in SW China (Chung and Jahn, 1995; Fig. 1A), silicic volcanic rocks are only a very rare component (<1%) of the total exposed igneous rocks (Shellnutt and Jahn, 2010; Xu et al., 2010). Their rarity in the rock archive might * Corresponding author. E-mail address: yjhcug@126.com (J. Yang). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2015.09.050 0012-821X/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. result from their dispersal due to the explosive nature of the silicic activity (e.g., Xu et al., 2010) and the 9. Conclusions: Silicic volcanism in LIPs has the potential to release massive volumes of volcanic gases into stratosphere and affect climate. Relative to flood basalts, silicic volcanic rocks have low preservation potential because of their preferential erosion and explosive nature, and thus their impact on environmental change is often overlooked. Estimating the original volume of silicic eruptions and the potential emissions of climate-sensitive gases (e.g., SO2) is important to fully understand the climate impact of LIP volcanism. In the Emeishan province of SW China, silicic volcanic rocks are restricted to the top of few volcanic sequences and form only a very minor component of the preserved rock record of the LIP. This volcanic province has been subject to extensive erosion after emplacement in the Late Permian as indicated by the petrological, geochemical and detrital zircon provenance analysis from the Late Permian sedimentary rocks in the adjacent basin. Modal and geochemical compositions of the derived sandstones indicate that the Emeishan source rocks include approximately 30% silicic volcanic rocks by volume. Two independent methods estimate the total volume of eroded Emeishan volcanic rocks in the Late Permian to be at 3 104 or 4.5 104 km3. Combining these estimates indicates that Emeishan silicic eruptions were at least 1 104 km3 in volume. Zircon grains within the sandstones, which are assumed to be derived from the Emeishan silicic source rocks, exhibit unimodal Late Permian ages of around 260 Ma and trace element trends that closely match zircons from Icelandic and Yellowstone rhyolitic rocks of hot-spot magmatic origins. Zircons from lower stratigraphic samples within the Shaiwa Formation have much lower Th/Nb and U/Yb ratios than those from the upper samples with Hf(t) values being positive for the lower samples and generally negative for the upper ones. These data suggest Emeishan silicic source rocks were generated by fractional crystallization of associated high-Ti basaltic magmas with decreasing crustal assimilation, consistent with studies on remnant Emeishan rhyolites and trachytes. Following experimental and theoretical calculations, the conservative estimate of 1 104 km3 basalt-derived silicic volcanism would potentially release 1 1017 g bulk sulfur. The now predominantly eroded silicic volcanic component of the Emeishan LIP therefore provided a hitherto unrecognized massive sulfur gas emission that was likely to significantly contribute to the global climate cooling at the Capitanian-Wuchiapingian transition (260 Ma). This volcano-climate effect hypothesis can be evaluated by climate proxy studies combined with high-precision dating from related sedimentary sequences. 
__label__SUPPORT  Effects of volcanism on tropical variability  Abstract: The effects of large tropical volcanic eruptions on Indo-Pacific tropical variability are investigated using 122 historical ensemble members from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5. Radiative forcing due to volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere is found to increase the likelihood of a model climatic response that projects onto both the El NinoSouthern Oscillation and the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD). Large eruptions are associated with co-occurring El Nino and positive IOD events in the ensemble means that peak 612 months after the volcanic forcing peaks, marking a significant increase in the likelihood of each event occurring in the Southern Hemisphere (SH) spring/summer posteruption. There is also an ensemble mean La Nina-like response in the third SH summer posteruption, which coincides with a significant increase in the likelihood of a La Nina occurring. Taken together with the initial cooling, this La Nina-like response may increase the persistence of the cool global average surface temperature anomaly after an eruption. 4. Discussion and Conclusions: Volcanic eruptions significantly cool SAT on timescales of 13 years after an eruption, with a recovery timescale of 67 years [Hegerl, 2003; Thompson et al., 2009]. The response of the CMIP5 models to the fiveMAHER ET AL. EFFECTS OF VOLCANISM 6030largest tropical eruptions over the last century roughly agrees with these observed timescales, with the peak volcanic cooling occurring around 1.5 years.Focusing on the tropical response to the five largest tropical eruptions over the last century, we examine whether there is a robust response in Indo-Pacific variability. While we consider both SST and SSH, SST is more difficult to interpret as changes in ENSO and IOD variability are superimposed on volcanic cooling. When considering the multimodel multivolcano mean, we find that between the eruption start and peak, in the equatorial band (5N to 5S) there is a global cooling signal consistent with a large-scale volcanic cooling due to aerosols across both the Indian and Pacific Oceans. After the eruption peak there is a tendency for a zonal gradient to develop in both the equatorial Pacific and Indian Oceans, which strengthens into a positive IOD and El Nino-like pattern in the first SH spring/summer after the eruption.The initial zonal gradient in SST is consistent with mechanisms relating to changes in zonal gradients of albedo and mean upwelling (dynamical thermostat) [e.g., Seager et al., 1988] highlighted in McGregor and Timmermann [2011], although the spatial structure appears to be more consistent with a dynamical thermostat mechanism [see McGregor and Timmermann, 2011, Figure 8d]. This zonal gradient is intensified over the year after the eruption. The El Nino response is also consistent with the study of Meehl et al. [2008]. albeit reversed, who showed that an increase in solar radiation causes an atmospheric response similar to a La Nina event. While the SST zonal gradient and changes in SSH are similar to those occurring during an El Nino event, the signal is not seen in eastern equatorial Pacific SST anomalies. This result agrees well with many previous studies such as Adams et al. [2003] but was not seen by Ding et al. [2014] in the CMIP5 models; likely as they did not have enough ensemble members and only considered the SST response and not SSH. The El Nino tends to co-occur with a positive IOD signal, although rather than a warm and cool anomaly, this manifests as a change in the zonal SST gradients superimposed on large-scale volcanic cooling. When considering the individual eruptions (supporting information Figures S2S7), the response of each is largely consistent with the multimodel mean. The exception is the Agung eruption which looks quite different from the other eruptions at the time of the eruption and the first SH summer/spring after the eruption. We hypothesize that this is due to the location of the Agung eruption as it is the furthest eruption from the equator. Supporting information Figure S8 illustrates the zonal shortwave radiation response after each eruption and demonstrates that Agung is the only eruption which does not show a cross-equatorial response.In the third summer after the eruption there is a flip in the east-west Pacific gradient, with cooler SST and lower SSH in the east equatorial Pacific compared to the west. This SSH response is weaker than the El Nino like response seen directly after event, but is still statistically significant. The ongoing volcanic signal acts to enhance the Pacific cooling. The equatorial zonal wind is anomalously westward consistent with a La Nina and provides the forcing to drive the SST and SSH response. Izumo et al. [2010] find that La Nina events tend to occur approximately 14 months after a positive IOD event in the Indian Ocean, due to a collapse of the wind anomalies in the Pacific induced by a breakdown of the IOD. This mechanism could explain the occurrence of this pattern in the models approximately 14 months after the positive IOD composite. This is also consistent with the fact that La Nina events tend to follow El Nino events [e.g., Okumura and Deser, 2011]. The occurrence of a La Nina pattern at this time is consistent with a previous study of McGregor et al. [2010], who use proxy records to show that there is a significant increase in the probability of a La Nina event occurring 3 years posteruption. Again, the response of each eruption is largely consistent with the multimodel mean (supporting information Figures S2S7). The exception here, however, is the Santa Maria eruption, which does not exhibit the drop in SSH or pronounced east Pacific cooling in the third SH summer after the eruption.It is widely known that the CMIP5 models have biases in the mean state and the representation of the modes of variability [Bellenger et al., 2014; Guilyardi et al., 2012; Weller and Cai, 2013], as such the question arises as to whether these biases impact on the projection of volcanic forcing onto ENSO and the IOD. In an attempt to answer this question we assess the impact of volcanic forcing on the subset of CMIP5 identified by Kim et al. [2014] that have more realistic ENSO (indicated in supporting information Table S1). As these models have a noticeably reduced equatorial Pacific cold tongue bias when compared to the remaining models, we also expect them to have a more realistic IOD location. With this subset of models we find that while there are model biases in ENSO and IOD, our results are robust to subsampling for the least biased models.Models also have different treatments of volcanic aerosols, which may influence the ENSO/IOD evolution. To test this, we subset the models by their underlying forcing data sets. While some differences exist (probablyMAHER ET AL. EFFECTS OF VOLCANISM 6031due to the small number of models in each subset and the larger aerosol depth in the Ammann data sets) our overall conclusions are robust.We propose that a volcanic eruption causes global cooling that increases the likelihood of an El Nino-like response in the Pacific Ocean and a co-occurring positive IOD event in the Indian Ocean. There is also an increased likelihood of a La Nina pattern occurring in the third DJF posteruption (i.e., 14 months later that the peak of the El Nino), which is enhanced in the SST field due to volcanic cooling. This signal, coherent with a weak negative IOD may enhance the persistence of postvolcanic cooling seen in CMIP5 models and the global climate system. 
__label__SUPPORT  Upheavals during the Late Maastrichtian: Volcanism, climate and faunal events preceding the end-Cretaceous mass extinction Introduction: The last five million years of the Maastrichtian experienced the coldest climate of the Cretaceous interrupted by two warm periods, major sea level fluctuations and faunal turnovers ending in the CretaceousTertiary boundary (KTB also known as KPg) mass extinction (Li and Keller, 1998a,b; Li et al., 2000; Keller, 2001; Nordt et al., 2003). Planktic foraminifera responded to these environmental upheavals by dramatically reduced diversity after the late Campanianearly Maastrichtian cooling. This cooling was followed by rapid evolution and diversification reaching maximum Cretaceous diversity during the first warm period of the early lateMaastrichtian (Keller, 2001). The second warm period near the end of the Maastrichtian marks the onset of the terminal decline leading to the mass extinction (Fig. 1). South Atlantic DSDP Site 525A has excellent climate and faunal records that mirror global climate changes through the Maastrichtian and yield insights into the environmental conditions that led to the KTB mass extinction (e.g., Li and Keller, 1998a,b,c, 1999; Keller, 2001; Abramovich and Keller, 2002, 2003; Thibault and Gardin, 2006, 2007; rsity, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. Friedrich et al., 2009; Abramovich et al., 2010). From the late Campanian to early Maastrichtian, deep ocean waters cooled from an average of 16 C to 5. Conclusions: Evaluation of high-stress planktic foraminiferal assemblages from the Indian Ocean to the Eastern Tethys and Gulf of Mexico (Texas)during the late Maastrichtian reveals two faunal upheavals during rapid climate warming, each associated with major volcanism.The early late Maastrichtian warming of 23 C in intermediate waters spans from ~69.5 to 68 Ma (upper C31r to base C30n, zones CF5CF4) and resulted in rapid evolutionary diversification in intermediate and surface waters increasing species assemblages by 43% marking the highest planktic foraminifer diversity in their history. At the same time high-stress conditions prevailed in surface and subsurface waters as marked by blooms of the disaster opportunist Guembelitria blooms and low oxygen tolerant small Heterohelix species.This evolution streak ends abruptly near the end of the warm event (top C31n)with a cluster of extinctions marking the onset of the terminal diversity decline that ends at the KTB mass extinction.The early late Maastrichtian climate warming and faunal upheaval correlate with major volcanic activity at DSDP Site 216 on Ninetyeast Ridge (Kerguelen hotspot) where volcanic sediments above basement basalt are dated ~69.5 Ma (nannofossil zone UC20a, planktic foraminiferal zones CF5CF4) and continued for about 2 million years. Deccan volcanism (phase-1) also began during this time interval although we are still uncertain about their age and duration.The latest Maastrichtian warm event in C29r (zones CF2CF1, UC20d) increased intermediate water temperatures by 34 C and resulted in extreme stress conditions marked by Guembelitria blooms, species dwarfing, reduced diversity and abundances of specialized species that ended with rapid mass extinction of nearly all species. Documentation of the mass extinction in intertrappean sediments between massive Deccan lava flows reveals Deccan volcanism phase-2 as the cause for the rapid warming and mass extinction.Global warming and high-stress conditions associated with early late and latest Maastrichtian volcanic events, are marked by Guembelitria blooms and reduced diversity and abundance of large specialized species particularly Globotruncanidae, with stress conditions at a maximum near volcanic centers and diminishing with distance. The highest stress condition (maximum Guembelitria blooms) mark maximum warming in C29r prior to the rapid mass extinction.Massive Deccan outgassing, climate warming and ocean acidification at the end of the Maastrichtian appear to be the direct causes for the mass extinction. The Chicxulub impact, now considered to predate themass extinction by ~100 kymay have contributed to this catastrophe but was not likely the cause. 
__label__SUPPORT  Some aspects of the PermianTriassic boundary (PTB) and of the possible causes for the biotic crisis around this boundary  Abstract: The first appearance datum (FAD) of Hindeodus parvus is an excellent datum very close to the base of the Otoceras woodwardi Zone (priority base of the Triassic). For the first time, it allows an exact correlation of the PTB in all marine facies and faunal realms. The following features of the extinction and recovery patterns near the PTB are most important for the search for causes of the PTB biotic crisis: (1) most strongly affected were the (siliceous) plankton (radiolarians) and the warm-water benthos and nekton; (2) most of the cold-water faunas were not significantly affected; (3) the recovery of the warm-water benthos and siliceous plankton occurred only after an unusually long time (during the late Olenekian and Middle Triassic); (4) the productivity of the terrestrial plants dropped strongly and the recovery was mainly in the upper Olenekian and in the Middle Triassic; (5) several terrestrial extinction events occurred at different levels within the Upper Permian, considerable before the marine PTB; at or close to the FAD of Lystrosaurus no extinction event in the terrestrial faunas can be observed; (6) terrestrial faunal elements that survived the DzhulfianDorashamian extinctions were able to survive some months of extreme climatic conditions by hibernation-like life stages (vertebrates), or by dryand freezing-resistant eggs (conchostracans); (7) about 50% of the genera that disappeared at the PTB re-appeared in the OlenekianMiddle Triassic interval (Lazarus taxa), or in this time interval genera appeared that had undoubtedly evolved from genera that had disappeared at the PTB; and (8) the PTB is preceded by mass occurrences of marine (and continental?) fungi, and the fungal spike ends abruptly a little before the PTB. A scenario for the PTB biotic crisis is elaborated that takes into consideration: the real (not interpolated) diversity patterns of different marine and continental fossil groups, the exact correlation of bioevents in different faunal realms and facies, the strong biotic crisis in the Tethyan warm-water faunas in contrast to the much weaker biotic event in cold-water faunas, the severe DzhulfianDorashamian climate in many parts of the world caused by the continentocean configuration and by Siberian Trap volcanism, the cooling of the Boreal area by the northward drift of Pangaea that interrupted the exchange of warm-water benthos between the Tethys and western North America during the Guadalupian, the extinction event at the GuadalupianLopingian boundary that restricted most of the affected warm-water faunas to the Tethys, the importance of lower Scythian anoxia that reached an unusually shallow level, and above all the effects of the contemporaneous huge volcanic events about 250 m.y. ago on the Siberian Platform and in the eastern Tethys that caused a 36-months-lasting volcanic winter with strong cooling in low latitudes, followed by a strong global warming. 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 6. Conclusions scenario for the PTB biotic crisis: In the following, a scenario for the continental and marine biotic crisis at the PTB is presented, and those conditions before this boundary are also mentioned that prepared the setting for the PTB biotic crisis. The Permian northward drift of Pangaea brought large parts of Pangaea into the tropical subtropical belt. By this, rather severe climatic con-ditions were present on large parts of Pangaea during the Late Permian, such as aridity and strong daily and seasonal temperature differences. A part of the faunas became adapted to survive several months of very severe climate (long drought, low winter temperatures below the freezing point in areas with hot or warm summers). At the same time, northern Pangaea drifted into the Boreal realm and the Upper Permian climate there became colder. This led to the disappearance of major warm-water fossil groups in the Arctic long before the PTB, such as the fusulinids at the base of the Guadalupian. Faunal exchange of warm-water benthos between the Tethys and the western shelf of America across the northern margin of Pangaea became more difficult and was finally interrupted. As a consequence, a strong provincialism developed with different shallow, warm-water faunas on the western shelf of America and in the Tethys. A very rapid and strong regression at the Guadalupian Lopingian boundary destroyed the habitats of large shelf areas (e.g. the Delaware Basin of southwestern North America changed into a hypersaline basin). In other basins, like the Phosphoria Basin, the warmwater fauna was additionally harmed by widespread upwelling of cold bottom water during the Guadalupian. Connected regional extinctions led to the disappearance of fusulinids on the western America warm-water shelf during the lowermost Dzhulfian. As benthic warm-water faunas could no longer migrate between the Tethys and western North America through the southern margin of the Boreal sea, major groups such as the fusulinids were restricted to the Tethys and eastern Perigondwana in the upper Dzhulfian and Dorashamian.After a very warm period in the lower Dzhulfian, since the upper part of the lower Dzhulfian, the climate became periodically more severe due to the influence of the largely explosive stage of Siberian Trap volcanism. At the same time, a slight global cooling began. Warm-water faunas successively disappeared from high and medium latitudes. At the Panthalassa margin of the Boreal sea, the last representatives of the C. leveniC. subcarinata warm-water lineage disappeared at the top of the C. niuzhuanensis Zone (lower Dzhulfian). In median latitudes the disappearance of the warm-water conodonts was somewhat later, after the upper Dzhulfian C. orientalis Zone.The eruptions of the Siberian Trap became increasingly stronger during the Dorashamian. Reduced input of sunlight because of aerosols of sulphate and dust favoured the development of marine (and continental?) fungi that became very common during the late Dorashamian (fungi spike). Acid rain harmed the gymnosperm forests and other plants, but did not influence swamp floras with Lycopodiales that were adapted to acid soil. Therefore, in many parts of the world, Lycopodiales floras indicated by increasing amounts of trilete cavate spores became common and in many places dominant, whereas the amount of gymnosperms decreased in the uppermost Permian. Repeated very short periods of cooling in low latitudes connected with dust and sulphate aerosols of the Siberian Trap volcanism, led to a drop in diversity of terrestrial vertebrates and freshwater faunas well before the PTB. At first the larger terrestrial tetrapods were affected (during the Dzhulfian), later those ostracods disappeared that preferred permanently warm climate, and latest a part of the conchostracans were affected. High-latitude faunas (adapted to survive polar night) became dominant also in medium and low latitudes. By this extinction mode, in the uppermost Dorashamian a low-diversity terrestrial and freshwater fauna was present, in which forms prevailed that could survive severe climatic conditions, including short cooler periods in low-latitude areas (Lystrosaurus at the terrestrial vertebrates, Falsisca and Eueestheria among conchostracans, Darwinula among the freshwater ostracods). Forms adapted to permanently warm climate become rare (Dicynodon).Cold climate in the Boreal realm, mainly caused by the northwards drift of Pangaea that brought the present Boreal areas into Upper Permian high northern latitudes, but worsened by the huge volcanic activity of the Siberian Trap, and a regression followed by a transgression led to the establishment of the very low-diversity Boreal Otoceras fauna during the late Dorashamian. At the beginning, beside cold and cool water conodonts of the C. carinata and H. typicalis lineages, there were last representatives of those conodonts that lived in low latitudes both in warm water and in cool bottom water (C. deflecta), but they soon disappeared. Highly diverse marine warm-water faunas were in that time restricted to the Tethys, low to moderately diverse marine faunas occurred in Perigondwana.In this situation, around 250 m.y. ago, the effusion of the Siberian Trap basalts culminated over an area of at least 2.5 million km2, possibly even up to 45 million km2, and huge highly explosive eruptions of acid to intermediate volcanism occurred in the eastern Tethys or at the TethyanPanthalassa margin, likewise in the Northern Hemisphere. Huge amounts of dust and sulphate aerosols came into the atmosphere and at least in the eastern Tethys a fall-out of volcanic dust over an area of at least 2 million km2 occurred. A drastic drop in temperature occurred also in the low latitudes, which lasted about 36 month (volcanic winter). Probably two such events occurred close to the PTB, one a little before the PTB (at the base of the C. meishanensisH. latidentatus praeparvus Zone) and the other a little after the PTB (at the base of the I. isarcica Zone). The time difference between both events was short (100,000 200,000 years). Most of the extinctions occurred in this time interval.The shallow water of the Tethyan shelves, the refugium for most of the latest Permian warm-water benthos, was cooled down below the critical temperatures for reef communities and the entire warmwater benthos, but in many places the entire warmwater nekton also disappeared on the shelves. Drastically reduced input of sunlight destroyed the feed source and ultimately nearly all the skeleton-bearing plankton (Radiolaria). The climatic catastrophe was more severe in the Northern Hemisphere, where the two huge volcanic centres were situated.The cold-water Otoceras fauna of the Boreal realm was not affected by this climatic catastrophe. The temperate- to cool-water eastern Perigondwana shelf was moderately affected because the number of warm-water adapted species was lower than in the tropical Tethys, and the climatic catastrophe was not as severe as in the Northern Hemisphere. A bipolar fauna was established, as Otoceras from the Boreal realm invaded this area at the base of the Triassic. The low-diversity uppermost Dorashamian terrestrial and freshwater fauna, to a large part already adapted to shorter periods of severe climate (freezing temperatures or drought), survived to a large part (e.g. Lystrosaurus that could also live in high southern latitude areas with polar night, conchostracans with dry- and freezing-resistant eggs, Darwinula that occurred both in tropical and Boreal areas), afterthose faunal elements that were adapted to permanent warm climate had died out earlier during the Dzhulfian and Dorashamian. Only the last representatives of the latter fauna, like Dicynodon, became extinct. The opportunistic swamp flora was not much affected by a short-lasting temperature drop also in low latitudes and acid rain, but some Permian gymnosperms disappeared. Only in the eastern Tethyan humid-tropical Cathaysia province, rather abrupt distinct changes in the flora can be observed. The tropical FilicalesPteridospermophyta rain forest flora largely disappeared, and the tropical highland flora of gymnosperms survived. Therefore, the Cathaysia flora became rich in gymnosperms (sudden increase in bisaccate pollen) during the biotic crisis in connection with the volcanic dust fall-out, whereas in other floral realms the spores (especially of the Lycopodiales swamp flora) became dominant over the bisaccate pollen. The explosive eruptions of the eastern Tethyan volcanic centre were so strong that even the ozone layer was depleted. By the strong UV radiation the mass occurrences of marine (or continental?) fungi suddenly disappeared nearly completely. The drop in water temperature in the central tropical Panthalassa was not so severe that the warm-water fauna disappeared from the narrow shelves of intraoceanic insular areas, where many warm-water taxa survived.The high content of dust in the atmosphere caused strong precipitation in those Boreal areas that were previously rather dry, and in the low-latitude dry girdles. By strong freshwater input in the Boreal sea, the downward sinking of the cold heavy surface water was interrupted or became insignificant. As a consequence, the cold oxygen-rich bottom water currents towards the low latitudes became insignificant. This caused widespread oceanic anoxia that reached to an unusually shallow level and prevented the recovery of the shallow, warm-water benthos in the Tethys.After the end of the Siberian Trap volcanism within the upper Gangetian, the global warming caused by the greenhouse gases (CO2 and high amount of water vapour) was no longer counterbalanced by the volcanic dust and sulphate aerosols. This caused a strong global warming at the beginning of the Gandarian (Dienerian) that was especially strong in the high latitudes. As a consequence, there was a minor extinction event in cold-waterfaunas that had survived the PTB biotic crisis (e.g. hindeodid conodonts), but above all, the oceanic anoxia continued. Thus, the warm-water benthos that had largely survived on the narrow shelves of inner oceanic islands in the tropical Panthalassa could not return to the Tethyan shelves for more than 5 m.y. As oceanic islands are unstable biotopes, during this long time many refuges were destroyed. Thus, finally, the strongly delayed recovery led to a delayed extinction, but many taxa survived this long interval of relative isolation. After the end of the anoxia they re-appeared on the Tethyan shelves during the late Olenekian or during the Middle Triassic. The anoxia was not the reason for the biotic crisis on a global scale (but an important reason for regional extinctions), but played an important role in the global extinction because this caused an unusually long delay in recovery. The survival of the warm-water benthos on inner oceanic insular relic areas explains the high percentage of Lazarus taxa, which constitute in some groups more than 90% of the genera that disappeared close to the PTB.A good example of insular survival of warmwater faunas that died out on the continental shelves long before, was given by Stanley (1993). He reported Sinemurian reefs with Triassic corals from Cordilleran volcanic terranes, whereas on the known shelves less than 1% of the Triassic corals survived into the Jurassic. The difference from the PTB biotic crisis is the rapid recovery of the faunas at the TriassicJurassic boundary because of the absence of a long and severe anoxic event.This scenario explains nearly all details of the extinction patterns in continental and marine biotopes. Only a few details are more difficult to explain. One is the strongly delayed recovery of the siliceous plankton that only began in the upper Olenekian. A possible explanation is that nearly all skeleton-bearing Radiolaria became extinct near the PTB, and the Triassic radiolarian fauna developed new from skeleton-less or spicular radiolarians (Kozur et al., 1996a). As the recovery of the high productivity of terrestrial plants was also in the upper Olenekian, there may be additionally still some unknown environmental factors that prevented the lower and middle Scythian recovery of the marine warm-water benthos, the siliceous plankton and the terrestrial plant communities. 
__label__SUPPORT  The dawn of CAMP volcanism and its bearing on the end-Triassic carbon cycle disruption  Abstract: The cause-and-effect relationship between the c. 201 Ma eruption of the Central Atlantic magmatic province (CAMP) and the end-Triassic abrupt climate change and mass extinction is at present based on controversial temporal correlations. Upper Triassic sedimentary strata underlying CAMP basalts in Morocco illustrate a clear mineralogical and geochemical fingerprint of early CAMP basaltic eruptions, namely unusually high contents of MgO (1032 wt%) and of mafic clay minerals (1184%). In the same rocks a coincident negative carbon-isotope excursion (CIE) is present, equivalent to the so-called initial negative CIE recorded worldwide shortly before the TriassicJurassic boundary. The new data show that the onset of CAMP activity preceded the end-Triassic carbon cycle disruption and that the initial negative CIE is unequivocally synchronous with CAMP volcanism. The results of this study strongly support the hypothesis that the culmination of pollution of atmosphere and seawater by CAMP-derived volcanic gases was the proximate cause of the end-Triassic mass extinction. Supplementary material: The stratigraphic position of analysed samples, and the C-isotope, bulk-rock mineralogy, element analysis, MgAlSi ternary diagram and trace-element analysis data are available at www. geolsoc.org.uk/SUP18707. research-articleResearch ArticleXXX10.1144/jgs2013-063J. DAL CORSO ET AL.CAMP VOLCAnISM AnD CARBOn CyCLE DISRUPTIOn 2014 Downloaded from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/jgs/article-pdf/171/2/153/2797736/153.pdf by University of Arizona user on 21 February 2019 J. DAL CORSO ET AL . 154 2004; Galli et al. 2005, 2007; Michalik et al. 2007; Wignall et al. 2007; Ruhl et al. 2009, 2011; Clemence et al. 2010; Deenen et al. 2010, 2011; Whiteside et al. 2010; Ruhl & kurschner 2011; Bartolini et al. 2012; Lindstrom et al. 2012) and is locally characterized by a maximum negative shift of 8.5 in leaf-wax n-alkanes (Ruhl et al. 2011). The initial negative CIE was followed by a long-term 3.5 main negative CIE (sensu Hesselbo et al. 2002) coincident with the first appearance of Jurassic biota. A recently defined minor (2 to 3) late Rhaetian precursor negative CIE (sensu Ruhl & kurschner 2011) in organic matter preceded the initial negative CIE (Fig. 1). As suggested by several researchers, one of the trigger mechanisms of the end-Triassic mass extinction and accompanying negative CIEs may have been the release of volcanic gases (mainly CO2 and SO2) from the Central Atlantic magmatic province (CAMP) into the oceanatmosphere system (Hesselbo et al. 2002; Guex et al. 2004; Marzoli et al. 2004; Palfy et al. 2007; Deenen et al. 2010; Whiteside et al. 2010; Ruhl et al. 2011; Schaller et al. 2011; Lindstrom et al. 2012; Mander et al. 2013). The relative timing of the magmatic event and of the negative CIEs, however, remains controversial. Radioisotopic dating (e.g. Schoene et al. 2010; Marzoli et al. 2011; Blackburn et al. 2013) suggests a synchrony between CAMP and mass extinction. A new zircon UPb radioisotopic age for a CAMP intrusion (Amelal sill), which possibly fed the second volcanic unit of the Argana Basin, Morocco, is indistinguishable in age (201.564 0.23 Ma) from the calculated age of a palynological turnover; that is, the disappearance of Patinasporites densus and the fern spike, recorded in the newark Basin and considered as recording the end-Triassic extinction (Blackburn et al. 2013). Radioisotopic dating of CAMP basalts does not resolve the relative timing of the onset of CAMP volcanism and of the carbon cycle perturbation and mass extinction. In fact, previous studies recording the initial negative CIE in continental sediments fixed it at a level below the first CAMP lava flows both in north America and Morocco (Deenen et al. 2010, 2011; Whiteside et al. 2010). Geochemical and mineralogical data from the marine section of kendlbachgraben in the northern Calcareous Alps (Austria) give evidence of distal deposition of mafic volcanic material, possibly deriving from early explosive CAMP activity that is coeval with or slightly precedes the initial CIE and the mass extinction level (Palfy & zajzon 2012). However, the extinction among various marine and terrestrial fauna and flora seems to have started before the initial CIE (e.g. Wignall & Bond 2008; Lindstrom et al. 2012; Mander et al. 2013). Hence, potential cause-and-effect relationships between CAMP volcanism, the initial negative CIE, and extinction on land and in the oceans are not rigorously established, given that existing data from below-CAMP continental sedimentary successions only suggest that the initial negative CIE and extinction stratigraphically preceded the initial outpouring of CAMP basalt. To constrain the relative timing between CAMP volcanism and the perturbation of the carbon cycle and thus elucidate further the possible role of the CAMP in triggering the end-Triassic environmental disruption and, by association, the mass extinction, two continental sedimentary successions cropping out below the oldest CAMP flood basalts in the Central High Atlas (Morocco) were investigated. Combined CTOC ( 13C of total organic carbon), palynology, major and trace elements, and mineralogy of the sediments precisely constrain the sequence of end-Triassic events. Conclusions: The new C-isotope, mineralogical, elemental and palynological data from two stratigraphic sections in Morocco that crop out below the oldest CAMP basalt flow give crucial new information about the links and the relative timing between end-Triassic volcanism, carbon cycle disruption and, by inference, mass extinction.(1) The studied sections are biostratigraphically constrained to the Late Triassic owing to the presence of a distinctive norian Rhaetian sporomorph assemblage (e.g. Classopollis murphyae, Classopollis torosus, Classopollis meyeranus, Patinasporites densus).(2) Immediately below the first CAMP flood basalt an up to c. 6 negative CIE has been recorded in organic matter and can be correlated with the initial end-Triassic CIE recognized worldwide in both continental and marine sections.(3) The studied sediments are characterized by unusually high mafic clay-mineral (up to 84%) and MgO (up to 32 wt%) content with peaks at multiple levels. Given the geological history of the region, and excluding the possibility of contact metamorphism and hydrothermal alteration, the presence of these minerals is best explained by the alteration and transport of early erupted CAMP basaltic material into the Central High Atlas basins.(4) The initial negative CIE in the Central High Atlas coincides with an abrupt increase in sedimentary levels of mafic CAMP-derived minerals. This relative maximum in mafic mineral abundance could correspond in time to a distinct peak of CAMP volcanism that exposed large areas of basalt to superficial weathering.(5) The data show that CAMP volcanism was already active when the positive rebound from the precursor negative CIE and the initial negative CIE occurred. These results show that the outpouring of CAMP basalt preceded the end-Triassic carbon cycle disruption and, by inference, the mass extinction.(6) This study supports the hypotheses that the end-Triassic carbon cycle disruption was triggered by CAMP volcanism, and that relative long-term pollution of the atmosphere and ocean by CAMP volcanic gases, such as CO2 and SO2, could have caused a progressive loss of marine and terrestrial species culminating in the endTriassic mass extinction.We thank P. Ditchfield and S. Wyatt (University of Oxford, Uk) for C-isotope analyses; C. Betto, S. Boesso, L. Franceschin (Universita degli Studi di Padova, Italy) and A. Giaretta (CnR-IGG Padova, Italy) for assistance in sample preparation; F. zorzi (Universita degli Studi di Padova, Italy) for XRD analyses; and D. Pasqual (Universita degli Studi di Padova, Italy) for XRF analyses. We gratefully acknowledge the reviews of A. Bartolini and J. Palfy, which greatly helped to improve the paper. Thanks go to Fondazione Cariparo (project: MARzECCE09 CA.RI.PA.RO., principal investigator A. Marzoli), FCT (Portugal, project PTDC/CTE-GIX//117298/2012) and CnRS-CnRST (FranceMorocco project PICS SDU 03/10) for funding. 
__label__SUPPORT  Calcareous nannofossils and Mesozoic oceanic anoxic events  Abstract: Twenty-five years ago, Mesozoic oceanic anoxic events (OAEs) were documented and formalised as intervals of widespread to global deposition of organic matter. The Toarcian, Early Aptian (OAE1a) and latest Cenomanian (OAE2) OAEs are truly global in nature, commonly carbonate-poor, and typically represented by organic carbon-rich black shales. In some areas, these OAEs are also characterised by abundant radiolarian-sands and silts. They are associated with negative and positive excursions in the Sr/Sr record, in addition to large global carbon-isotope anomalies in carbonate and/or organic matter, caused by a major perturbation of the global carbon budget. Increased rates of volcanism during the formation of the Ontong Java (and Manihiki) and Caribbean Plates, and the Karoo-Ferrar Traps, are believed to have caused the geological responses associated with OAE1a, OAE2, and the Toarcian OAE, respectively. Excess volcanogenic CO2 in the atmosphere most probably turned the climate into a greenhouse mode, accelerating continental weathering and increasing nutrient content in oceanic surface-waters via river run-off. Higher fertility in the global ocean was also probably triggered directly by submarine igneous events that introduced enormous quantities of biolimiting metals within hydrothermal plumes. Because Mesozoic OAEs are often represented by carbonate-poor sediments, quantitative studies of calcareous nannofossils have been applied to explore (a) the causes and effects of igneous/tectonic events and climate changes, relative to nannofloral increases and crises, as well as (b) dissolution events, and (c) diagenetic modifications. Characterization of calcareous nannofloras in OAE intervals can improve our understanding of the marine ecosystem and biological processes such as photosynthesis (biological pump) and biomineralisation (carbonate pump) that affect the organic and inorganic carbon cycle, as well as adsorption of atmospheric CO2 in the oceans. Types and rates of nannoplankton production and evolution are interpreted to trace the impact of major palaeoceanographic and palaeoclimatic events. In selected sections, it has been documented that calcareous nannofloras rapidly reacted to new conditions of fertility and higher pCO2 by drastically reducing calcification. As in the modern oceans, during OAEs the increase of nutrients and atmospheric CO2 induced higher abundances of nannoplankton producing small placoliths and inhibited the deep-photic zone nannoconids and schizosphaerellids. Similarly to the nannoconid crisis preceding deposition of the Early Aptian OAE1a black shales, a schizosphaerellid crisis is detected prior to the Toarcian OAE. Both OAEs are further characterised by a rapid nannofloral speciation, beginning approximately 1.5 myr before the OAE, but without extinctions. Global changes during the latest Cenomanian OAE 2 exerted different influences on calcareous nannoplankton that experienced a turnover due to most extreme environmental conditions. This event, in fact, was a time of extinctions followed by originations within calcareous 0377-8398/$ see front matter D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.marmicro.2004.04.007 * Fax: +39-2-50315494. E-mail address: elisabetta.erba@unimi.it (E. Erba). E. Erba / Marine Micropaleontology 52 (2004) 85106 86 nannofossils. Precise timing of the events before, during and after OAE1a, OAE2 and the Toarcian OAE indicates that they were intervals of enhanced oceanic productivity and that anoxia/dysoxia post-dated biotic changes. D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
__label__SUPPORT  Significant radiative impact of volcanic aerosol in the lowermost stratosphere  Abstract: Despite their potential to slow global warming, until recently, the radiative forcing associated with volcanic aerosols in the lowermost stratosphere (LMS) had not been considered. Here we study volcanic aerosol changes in the stratosphere using lidar measurements from the NASA CALIPSO satellite and aircraft measurements from the IAGOS-CARIBIC observatory. Between 2008 and 2012 volcanism frequently affected the Northern Hemisphere stratosphere aerosol loadings, whereas the Southern Hemisphere generally had loadings close to background conditions. We show that half of the global stratospheric aerosol optical depth following the Kasatochi, Sarychev and Nabro eruptions is attributable to LMS aerosol. On average, 30% of the global stratospheric aerosol optical depth originated in the LMS during the period 20082011. On the basis of the two independent, high-resolution measurement methods, we show that the LMS makes an important contribution to the overall volcanic forcing. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8692 OPEN 
__label__SUPPORT  Estimates of volcanic-induced cooling in the Northern Hemisphere over the past 1,500 years  Abstract: Explosive volcanism can alter global climate, and hence trigger economic, political and demographic change1,2. The climatic impact of the largest volcanic events has been assessed in numerous modelling studies and tree-ring-based hemispheric temperature reconstructions36. However, volcanic surface cooling derived from climate model simulations is systematically much stronger than the cooling seen in tree-ring-based proxies, suggesting that the proxies underestimate cooling7,8; and/or the modelled forcing is unrealistically high9. Here, we present summer temperature reconstructions for the Northern Hemisphere from tree-ring width and maximum latewood density over the past 1,500 years. We also simulate the climate e ects of two large eruptions, in AD 1257 and 1815, using a climate model that accounts explicitly for self-limiting aerosol microphysical processes3,10. Our tree-ring reconstructions show greater cooling than reconstructions with lower spatial coverage and based on tree-ring width alone, whereas our simulations show less cooling than previous simulations relying on poorly constrained eruption seasons and excluding nonlinear aerosol microphysics. Our tree-ring reconstructions and climate simulations are in agreement, with a mean NorthernHemisphere extra-tropical summer cooling over land of 0.8 to 1.3 C for these eruptions. This reconciliation of proxy and model evidence paves the way to improved assessment of the role of both past and future volcanism in climate forcing. Drawing on glaciochemical and volcanological evidence, the largest eruptions of the past 1,500 years occurred in Indonesia in 1257 (Samalas11) and April 1815 (Tambora1,12,13). The cooling induced by the Tambora eruption led to the year without a summer1,13, in central and western Europe and northeastern America. Based on sulphate deposition in bipolar ice cores, previous estimates assumed that the radiative forcing from both eruptions was several times greater than that associated with the 1991 Pinatubo eruption. Contradictory results have emerged in previous assessments of the response to such perturbations: whereas global climate models predict a mean Northern Hemisphere (NH) summer cooling of 2.5 C, the temperature response in tree-ring reconstructions has been described as largely muted, being a factor of two to four times smaller8. Here, we investigate the cooling response to large volcanic eruptions in dendroclimatic series by developing new annually resolved 1500-year summer (JuneAugust, JJA) NH extra-tropical (4090N) land temperature reconstructions. These are based on careful selection of published chronologies combined with new data sets from formerly under-represented regions (including Quebec, Qilian Mountains, Central Europe, French Alps; Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). The selection incorporates 233 JJA temperature-sensitive chronologies (127 tree-ring width (TRW) and 106 maximum latewood density (MXD) chronologies) of which an unprecedented 47 cover the thirteenth century. MXD data show a stronger high-frequency response to climate because of lower biological persistence than TRW, making them more suitable for the quantification of abrupt summer cooling induced by volcanic eruptions14. We construct two hemispheric records (NH1, NH2) from site series, grouped into 30 clusters (16 MXD, 14 TRW, amongst which 8 and 12 cover the thirteenth century, respectively; Fig. 1a). The spatial coverage is denser and more balanced than in previous work5 that used only 19 clusters (of which only 8, 1 of them MXD, extended back to 1200) from sites mostly located in northwest America (>60 N). In NH1, a nested reconstruction method was used to stabilize variance, with a new nest created at each decrease in the number of available chronologies (Methods). The 32 nests, calibrated with instrumental JJA temperatures15, passed all verification tests (Methods and Fig. 1b,c and Supplementary Table 2). NH2 (Fig. 1d) represents the average of 22 regional reconstructions; they correlate with series of JJA temperatures15,16 over the areas corresponding to the chronology clusterswithR2 values varying between 0.19 and 0.74 (19011990; p< 0.01; Supplementary Table 3). NH1 and NH2 are significantly correlated (r=0.85, from 500 to 2003). Both reconstructions show pronounced cooling after the largest eruptions of the Common Era. Among the ten coldest years of the NH1 (NH2) reconstruction (5002003), seven (six) coincide with major sulphate spikes identified in ice-core records (Supplementary Table 4). In contrast to previous tree-ring reconstructions of NH temperature5,17, which were not designed for studies of climate response at inter-annual timescales14, our reconstructions reveal cooling induced by eruptions in 535 (unidentified volcano; 
__label__SUPPORT  Effects of volcanism on tropical variability  Abstract: The effects of large tropical volcanic eruptions on Indo-Pacific tropical variability are investigated using 122 historical ensemble members from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5. Radiative forcing due to volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere is found to increase the likelihood of a model climatic response that projects onto both the El NinoSouthern Oscillation and the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD). Large eruptions are associated with co-occurring El Nino and positive IOD events in the ensemble means that peak 612 months after the volcanic forcing peaks, marking a significant increase in the likelihood of each event occurring in the Southern Hemisphere (SH) spring/summer posteruption. There is also an ensemble mean La Nina-like response in the third SH summer posteruption, which coincides with a significant increase in the likelihood of a La Nina occurring. Taken together with the initial cooling, this La Nina-like response may increase the persistence of the cool global average surface temperature anomaly after an eruption. 4. Discussion and Conclusions: Volcanic eruptions significantly cool SAT on timescales of 13 years after an eruption, with a recovery timescale of 67 years [Hegerl, 2003; Thompson et al., 2009]. The response of the CMIP5 models to the fiveMAHER ET AL. EFFECTS OF VOLCANISM 6030largest tropical eruptions over the last century roughly agrees with these observed timescales, with the peak volcanic cooling occurring around 1.5 years.Focusing on the tropical response to the five largest tropical eruptions over the last century, we examine whether there is a robust response in Indo-Pacific variability. While we consider both SST and SSH, SST is more difficult to interpret as changes in ENSO and IOD variability are superimposed on volcanic cooling. When considering the multimodel multivolcano mean, we find that between the eruption start and peak, in the equatorial band (5N to 5S) there is a global cooling signal consistent with a large-scale volcanic cooling due to aerosols across both the Indian and Pacific Oceans. After the eruption peak there is a tendency for a zonal gradient to develop in both the equatorial Pacific and Indian Oceans, which strengthens into a positive IOD and El Nino-like pattern in the first SH spring/summer after the eruption.The initial zonal gradient in SST is consistent with mechanisms relating to changes in zonal gradients of albedo and mean upwelling (dynamical thermostat) [e.g., Seager et al., 1988] highlighted in McGregor and Timmermann [2011], although the spatial structure appears to be more consistent with a dynamical thermostat mechanism [see McGregor and Timmermann, 2011, Figure 8d]. This zonal gradient is intensified over the year after the eruption. The El Nino response is also consistent with the study of Meehl et al. [2008]. albeit reversed, who showed that an increase in solar radiation causes an atmospheric response similar to a La Nina event. While the SST zonal gradient and changes in SSH are similar to those occurring during an El Nino event, the signal is not seen in eastern equatorial Pacific SST anomalies. This result agrees well with many previous studies such as Adams et al. [2003] but was not seen by Ding et al. [2014] in the CMIP5 models; likely as they did not have enough ensemble members and only considered the SST response and not SSH. The El Nino tends to co-occur with a positive IOD signal, although rather than a warm and cool anomaly, this manifests as a change in the zonal SST gradients superimposed on large-scale volcanic cooling. When considering the individual eruptions (supporting information Figures S2S7), the response of each is largely consistent with the multimodel mean. The exception is the Agung eruption which looks quite different from the other eruptions at the time of the eruption and the first SH summer/spring after the eruption. We hypothesize that this is due to the location of the Agung eruption as it is the furthest eruption from the equator. Supporting information Figure S8 illustrates the zonal shortwave radiation response after each eruption and demonstrates that Agung is the only eruption which does not show a cross-equatorial response.In the third summer after the eruption there is a flip in the east-west Pacific gradient, with cooler SST and lower SSH in the east equatorial Pacific compared to the west. This SSH response is weaker than the El Nino like response seen directly after event, but is still statistically significant. The ongoing volcanic signal acts to enhance the Pacific cooling. The equatorial zonal wind is anomalously westward consistent with a La Nina and provides the forcing to drive the SST and SSH response. Izumo et al. [2010] find that La Nina events tend to occur approximately 14 months after a positive IOD event in the Indian Ocean, due to a collapse of the wind anomalies in the Pacific induced by a breakdown of the IOD. This mechanism could explain the occurrence of this pattern in the models approximately 14 months after the positive IOD composite. This is also consistent with the fact that La Nina events tend to follow El Nino events [e.g., Okumura and Deser, 2011]. The occurrence of a La Nina pattern at this time is consistent with a previous study of McGregor et al. [2010], who use proxy records to show that there is a significant increase in the probability of a La Nina event occurring 3 years posteruption. Again, the response of each eruption is largely consistent with the multimodel mean (supporting information Figures S2S7). The exception here, however, is the Santa Maria eruption, which does not exhibit the drop in SSH or pronounced east Pacific cooling in the third SH summer after the eruption.It is widely known that the CMIP5 models have biases in the mean state and the representation of the modes of variability [Bellenger et al., 2014; Guilyardi et al., 2012; Weller and Cai, 2013], as such the question arises as to whether these biases impact on the projection of volcanic forcing onto ENSO and the IOD. In an attempt to answer this question we assess the impact of volcanic forcing on the subset of CMIP5 identified by Kim et al. [2014] that have more realistic ENSO (indicated in supporting information Table S1). As these models have a noticeably reduced equatorial Pacific cold tongue bias when compared to the remaining models, we also expect them to have a more realistic IOD location. With this subset of models we find that while there are model biases in ENSO and IOD, our results are robust to subsampling for the least biased models.Models also have different treatments of volcanic aerosols, which may influence the ENSO/IOD evolution. To test this, we subset the models by their underlying forcing data sets. While some differences exist (probablyMAHER ET AL. EFFECTS OF VOLCANISM 6031due to the small number of models in each subset and the larger aerosol depth in the Ammann data sets) our overall conclusions are robust.We propose that a volcanic eruption causes global cooling that increases the likelihood of an El Nino-like response in the Pacific Ocean and a co-occurring positive IOD event in the Indian Ocean. There is also an increased likelihood of a La Nina pattern occurring in the third DJF posteruption (i.e., 14 months later that the peak of the El Nino), which is enhanced in the SST field due to volcanic cooling. This signal, coherent with a weak negative IOD may enhance the persistence of postvolcanic cooling seen in CMIP5 models and the global climate system. 
__label__SUPPORT  Upheavals during the Late Maastrichtian: Volcanism, climate and faunal events preceding the end-Cretaceous mass extinction Introduction: The last five million years of the Maastrichtian experienced the coldest climate of the Cretaceous interrupted by two warm periods, major sea level fluctuations and faunal turnovers ending in the CretaceousTertiary boundary (KTB also known as KPg) mass extinction (Li and Keller, 1998a,b; Li et al., 2000; Keller, 2001; Nordt et al., 2003). Planktic foraminifera responded to these environmental upheavals by dramatically reduced diversity after the late Campanianearly Maastrichtian cooling. This cooling was followed by rapid evolution and diversification reaching maximum Cretaceous diversity during the first warm period of the early lateMaastrichtian (Keller, 2001). The second warm period near the end of the Maastrichtian marks the onset of the terminal decline leading to the mass extinction (Fig. 1). South Atlantic DSDP Site 525A has excellent climate and faunal records that mirror global climate changes through the Maastrichtian and yield insights into the environmental conditions that led to the KTB mass extinction (e.g., Li and Keller, 1998a,b,c, 1999; Keller, 2001; Abramovich and Keller, 2002, 2003; Thibault and Gardin, 2006, 2007; rsity, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. Friedrich et al., 2009; Abramovich et al., 2010). From the late Campanian to early Maastrichtian, deep ocean waters cooled from an average of 16 C to 5. Conclusions: Evaluation of high-stress planktic foraminiferal assemblages from the Indian Ocean to the Eastern Tethys and Gulf of Mexico (Texas)during the late Maastrichtian reveals two faunal upheavals during rapid climate warming, each associated with major volcanism.The early late Maastrichtian warming of 23 C in intermediate waters spans from ~69.5 to 68 Ma (upper C31r to base C30n, zones CF5CF4) and resulted in rapid evolutionary diversification in intermediate and surface waters increasing species assemblages by 43% marking the highest planktic foraminifer diversity in their history. At the same time high-stress conditions prevailed in surface and subsurface waters as marked by blooms of the disaster opportunist Guembelitria blooms and low oxygen tolerant small Heterohelix species.This evolution streak ends abruptly near the end of the warm event (top C31n)with a cluster of extinctions marking the onset of the terminal diversity decline that ends at the KTB mass extinction.The early late Maastrichtian climate warming and faunal upheaval correlate with major volcanic activity at DSDP Site 216 on Ninetyeast Ridge (Kerguelen hotspot) where volcanic sediments above basement basalt are dated ~69.5 Ma (nannofossil zone UC20a, planktic foraminiferal zones CF5CF4) and continued for about 2 million years. Deccan volcanism (phase-1) also began during this time interval although we are still uncertain about their age and duration.The latest Maastrichtian warm event in C29r (zones CF2CF1, UC20d) increased intermediate water temperatures by 34 C and resulted in extreme stress conditions marked by Guembelitria blooms, species dwarfing, reduced diversity and abundances of specialized species that ended with rapid mass extinction of nearly all species. Documentation of the mass extinction in intertrappean sediments between massive Deccan lava flows reveals Deccan volcanism phase-2 as the cause for the rapid warming and mass extinction.Global warming and high-stress conditions associated with early late and latest Maastrichtian volcanic events, are marked by Guembelitria blooms and reduced diversity and abundance of large specialized species particularly Globotruncanidae, with stress conditions at a maximum near volcanic centers and diminishing with distance. The highest stress condition (maximum Guembelitria blooms) mark maximum warming in C29r prior to the rapid mass extinction.Massive Deccan outgassing, climate warming and ocean acidification at the end of the Maastrichtian appear to be the direct causes for the mass extinction. The Chicxulub impact, now considered to predate themass extinction by ~100 kymay have contributed to this catastrophe but was not likely the cause. 
__label__SUPPORT  Detailed clay mineralogy of the Triassic- Jurassic boundary section at Kendlbachgraben (Northern Calcareous Alps, Austria)  Abstract: The Triassic-Jurassic boundary (TJB) is marked by one of the five largest Phanerozoic mass extinctions. To constrain existing models for TJB events, we obtained a stratigraphically highly resolved dataset from a marine section at Kendlbachgraben, Austria. The topmost Triassic Kossen Formation contains low to medium-charged smectite and vermiculite as alteration products of mafic-ultramafic minerals. The clay minerals in the boundary mudstone are kaolinite 5 illite + muscovite >> smectite > chlorite. Predominant kaolinite suggests humid climate and abundant terrigenous input. In the lowermost Jurassic, the clay mineral pattern changes to illite + muscovite >> kaolinite >> smectite, which reflects change to less humid and more moderate climate. The topmost Kossen Formation also contains clay spherules. Their composition, shape and size indicate that they are alteration products of airborne volcanic glass droplets solidified in the air, settled in the sea and altered rapidly with negligible transport in terrestrial or marine environments. Our data are consistent with sudden climatic change at the TJB, as a result of large-scale volcanic activity of the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province which produced distal airfall volcanic ash. 
__label__SUPPORT  End-Permian Mass Extinction in the Oceans: An Ancient Analog for the Twenty-First Century?  Abstract: The greatest loss of biodiversity in the history of animal life occurred at the end of the Permian Period (252 million years ago). This biotic catastrophe coincided with an interval of widespread ocean anoxia and the eruption of one of Earths largest continental flood basalt provinces, the Siberian Traps. Volatile release from basaltic magma and sedimentary strata during emplacement of the Siberian Traps can account for most end-Permian paleontological and geochemical observations. Climate change and, perhaps, destruction of the ozone layer can explain extinctions on land, whereas changes in ocean oxygen levels, CO2, pH, and temperature can account for extinction selectivity across marine animals. These emerging insights from geology, geochemistry, and paleobiology suggest that the end-Permian extinction may serve as an important ancient analog for twenty-first century oceans. 89 A nn u. R ev . E ar th P la ne t. Sc i. 20 12 .4 0: 89 -1 11 . D ow nl oa de d fr om w w w .a nn ua lr ev ie w s. or g A cc es s pr ov id ed b y U ni ve rs ity o f A ri zo na L ib ra ry o n 02 /2 1/ 19 . F or p er so na l u se o nl y. EA40CH05-Payne ARI 23 March 2012 10:24 
__label__SUPPORT  Total sulfur dioxide emissions and preeruption vaporsaturated magma at Mount St. Helens, 198088  Abstract: SO2 from explosive volcanism can cause significant climatic and atmospheric impacts, but the source of the sulfur is controversial. TOMS, COSPEC, and ash leachate data for Mount St. Helens from the time of the climactic eruption on 18 May 1980 to the final stages of non-explosive degassing in 1988 give a total SO2 emission of 2 Mt. COSPEC data show a sharp drop in emission rate that was apparently controlled by a decreasing rate of magma supply. A total SO2 emission of only 0.08 Mt is estimated from melt inclusion data and the conventional assumption that the main sulfur source was pre-emption melt; commonly invoked sources of excess sulfur (anhydrite decomposition, basaltic magma, and degassing of non-erupted magma) are unlikely in this case. Thus melt inclusions may significantly underestimate SO2 emissions and impacts of explosive volcanism on climate and the atmosphere. Measured CO2 emissions, together with the H20 content of melt inclusions and experimental solubility data, indicate the Mount St. Helens dacite was vapor-saturated at depth prior to ascent and suggest hat a vapor phase was the main source of sulfur for the 2-Mt of SO2. A vapor source is consistent with experimental studies on the Mount St. Hetens dacite and removes the need for a much debated shallow magma body. 
__label__SUPPORT  Stratospheric loading and optical depth estimates of explosive volcanism over the last 2100 years derived from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 ice core  Abstract: The high-resolution and lengthy records of volcanic aerosol deposition in ice cores allow assessment of the atmospheric mpact of different styles and magnitudes of past eruptions and the impact of volcanism during periods of varied climatic onditions. The 2100-year long volcanic SO42time series in the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) ice core was used to calculate the mass stratospheric loading (MD) of H2SO 4 and resulting optical depth values (XD = MD/1.5 x 10 TM g) for individual, and multiple, closely spaced eruptions. Calibration of the calculated optical depth values with other compilations panning the last 150 years provides a range of values for each eruption or set of eruptions essential to quantifying the climate forcing capabilities of each of these events. Limitations on the use of the results exist because this is only a single ice core, sampling was biannual and transport, and deposition of aerosols is not consistent among individual eruptions. The record of volcanic optical depth estimates is characterized by distinct rends within three consecutive 700-year time periods. The period from 100 B.C. to A.D. 600 is characterized by the fewest eruptions, and optical depth values are lower than those in the rest of the record. The exception is an extremely large signal of 3 years duration that is probably associated with an unknown Icelandic eruption around 53 B.C., with the possible contribution of another high-latitude ruption. The presence of another signal at 43 B.C. suggests that at least two eruptions impacted climate in the middle decade of the 1st century B.C. The period from A.D. 600 to 1300 has intermediate numbers and magnitudes of volcanic events except for the very large 1259 event. Stratospheric loading and optical depths values for the 1259 event are twice that for Tambora (A.D. 1815). The state of the climate system in the middle of the thirteenth century A.D. may not have been sensitive nough to the atmospheric perturbation of the 1259 eruption, thus the apparent lack of abundant proxy evidence of climatic cooling around A.D. 1260. The most recent 700 years (A.D. 1400-1985) are characterized by the greatest number of eruptions (half of those recorded over the 2100 years of record) and, in general, the highest stratospheric loading and optical depth values for individual and the combined effects of multiple eruptions. The large Kuwae eruption (A.D. 1450s) may have perturbe the atmosphere at least as much as Krakatau and possibly of a magnitude similar to Tambora. Multiple eruptions in the 50to 60-year periods from A.D. 1580s-1640s and A.D. 1780s-1830s may have had a significant impact on enhancing the already cool climatic conditions in those time periods, particularly around A.D. 1601 and 1641. These findings imply that multiple eruptions closely spaced in time are more likely to have a major impact on a decadal time scale when existing climatic conditions are in a more sensitive or transitional state. The GISP2 ice core record also indicates that several relatively unknown eruptions may have been large sulfur producers during the 17th and 19th centuries A.D., thereby warranting further studies of those particular events. 
__label__SUPPORT  Some aspects of the PermianTriassic boundary (PTB) and of the possible causes for the biotic crisis around this boundary  Abstract: The first appearance datum (FAD) of Hindeodus parvus is an excellent datum very close to the base of the Otoceras woodwardi Zone (priority base of the Triassic). For the first time, it allows an exact correlation of the PTB in all marine facies and faunal realms. The following features of the extinction and recovery patterns near the PTB are most important for the search for causes of the PTB biotic crisis: (1) most strongly affected were the (siliceous) plankton (radiolarians) and the warm-water benthos and nekton; (2) most of the cold-water faunas were not significantly affected; (3) the recovery of the warm-water benthos and siliceous plankton occurred only after an unusually long time (during the late Olenekian and Middle Triassic); (4) the productivity of the terrestrial plants dropped strongly and the recovery was mainly in the upper Olenekian and in the Middle Triassic; (5) several terrestrial extinction events occurred at different levels within the Upper Permian, considerable before the marine PTB; at or close to the FAD of Lystrosaurus no extinction event in the terrestrial faunas can be observed; (6) terrestrial faunal elements that survived the DzhulfianDorashamian extinctions were able to survive some months of extreme climatic conditions by hibernation-like life stages (vertebrates), or by dryand freezing-resistant eggs (conchostracans); (7) about 50% of the genera that disappeared at the PTB re-appeared in the OlenekianMiddle Triassic interval (Lazarus taxa), or in this time interval genera appeared that had undoubtedly evolved from genera that had disappeared at the PTB; and (8) the PTB is preceded by mass occurrences of marine (and continental?) fungi, and the fungal spike ends abruptly a little before the PTB. A scenario for the PTB biotic crisis is elaborated that takes into consideration: the real (not interpolated) diversity patterns of different marine and continental fossil groups, the exact correlation of bioevents in different faunal realms and facies, the strong biotic crisis in the Tethyan warm-water faunas in contrast to the much weaker biotic event in cold-water faunas, the severe DzhulfianDorashamian climate in many parts of the world caused by the continentocean configuration and by Siberian Trap volcanism, the cooling of the Boreal area by the northward drift of Pangaea that interrupted the exchange of warm-water benthos between the Tethys and western North America during the Guadalupian, the extinction event at the GuadalupianLopingian boundary that restricted most of the affected warm-water faunas to the Tethys, the importance of lower Scythian anoxia that reached an unusually shallow level, and above all the effects of the contemporaneous huge volcanic events about 250 m.y. ago on the Siberian Platform and in the eastern Tethys that caused a 36-months-lasting volcanic winter with strong cooling in low latitudes, followed by a strong global warming. 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 6. Conclusions scenario for the PTB biotic crisis: In the following, a scenario for the continental and marine biotic crisis at the PTB is presented, and those conditions before this boundary are also mentioned that prepared the setting for the PTB biotic crisis. The Permian northward drift of Pangaea brought large parts of Pangaea into the tropical subtropical belt. By this, rather severe climatic con-ditions were present on large parts of Pangaea during the Late Permian, such as aridity and strong daily and seasonal temperature differences. A part of the faunas became adapted to survive several months of very severe climate (long drought, low winter temperatures below the freezing point in areas with hot or warm summers). At the same time, northern Pangaea drifted into the Boreal realm and the Upper Permian climate there became colder. This led to the disappearance of major warm-water fossil groups in the Arctic long before the PTB, such as the fusulinids at the base of the Guadalupian. Faunal exchange of warm-water benthos between the Tethys and the western shelf of America across the northern margin of Pangaea became more difficult and was finally interrupted. As a consequence, a strong provincialism developed with different shallow, warm-water faunas on the western shelf of America and in the Tethys. A very rapid and strong regression at the Guadalupian Lopingian boundary destroyed the habitats of large shelf areas (e.g. the Delaware Basin of southwestern North America changed into a hypersaline basin). In other basins, like the Phosphoria Basin, the warmwater fauna was additionally harmed by widespread upwelling of cold bottom water during the Guadalupian. Connected regional extinctions led to the disappearance of fusulinids on the western America warm-water shelf during the lowermost Dzhulfian. As benthic warm-water faunas could no longer migrate between the Tethys and western North America through the southern margin of the Boreal sea, major groups such as the fusulinids were restricted to the Tethys and eastern Perigondwana in the upper Dzhulfian and Dorashamian.After a very warm period in the lower Dzhulfian, since the upper part of the lower Dzhulfian, the climate became periodically more severe due to the influence of the largely explosive stage of Siberian Trap volcanism. At the same time, a slight global cooling began. Warm-water faunas successively disappeared from high and medium latitudes. At the Panthalassa margin of the Boreal sea, the last representatives of the C. leveniC. subcarinata warm-water lineage disappeared at the top of the C. niuzhuanensis Zone (lower Dzhulfian). In median latitudes the disappearance of the warm-water conodonts was somewhat later, after the upper Dzhulfian C. orientalis Zone.The eruptions of the Siberian Trap became increasingly stronger during the Dorashamian. Reduced input of sunlight because of aerosols of sulphate and dust favoured the development of marine (and continental?) fungi that became very common during the late Dorashamian (fungi spike). Acid rain harmed the gymnosperm forests and other plants, but did not influence swamp floras with Lycopodiales that were adapted to acid soil. Therefore, in many parts of the world, Lycopodiales floras indicated by increasing amounts of trilete cavate spores became common and in many places dominant, whereas the amount of gymnosperms decreased in the uppermost Permian. Repeated very short periods of cooling in low latitudes connected with dust and sulphate aerosols of the Siberian Trap volcanism, led to a drop in diversity of terrestrial vertebrates and freshwater faunas well before the PTB. At first the larger terrestrial tetrapods were affected (during the Dzhulfian), later those ostracods disappeared that preferred permanently warm climate, and latest a part of the conchostracans were affected. High-latitude faunas (adapted to survive polar night) became dominant also in medium and low latitudes. By this extinction mode, in the uppermost Dorashamian a low-diversity terrestrial and freshwater fauna was present, in which forms prevailed that could survive severe climatic conditions, including short cooler periods in low-latitude areas (Lystrosaurus at the terrestrial vertebrates, Falsisca and Eueestheria among conchostracans, Darwinula among the freshwater ostracods). Forms adapted to permanently warm climate become rare (Dicynodon).Cold climate in the Boreal realm, mainly caused by the northwards drift of Pangaea that brought the present Boreal areas into Upper Permian high northern latitudes, but worsened by the huge volcanic activity of the Siberian Trap, and a regression followed by a transgression led to the establishment of the very low-diversity Boreal Otoceras fauna during the late Dorashamian. At the beginning, beside cold and cool water conodonts of the C. carinata and H. typicalis lineages, there were last representatives of those conodonts that lived in low latitudes both in warm water and in cool bottom water (C. deflecta), but they soon disappeared. Highly diverse marine warm-water faunas were in that time restricted to the Tethys, low to moderately diverse marine faunas occurred in Perigondwana.In this situation, around 250 m.y. ago, the effusion of the Siberian Trap basalts culminated over an area of at least 2.5 million km2, possibly even up to 45 million km2, and huge highly explosive eruptions of acid to intermediate volcanism occurred in the eastern Tethys or at the TethyanPanthalassa margin, likewise in the Northern Hemisphere. Huge amounts of dust and sulphate aerosols came into the atmosphere and at least in the eastern Tethys a fall-out of volcanic dust over an area of at least 2 million km2 occurred. A drastic drop in temperature occurred also in the low latitudes, which lasted about 36 month (volcanic winter). Probably two such events occurred close to the PTB, one a little before the PTB (at the base of the C. meishanensisH. latidentatus praeparvus Zone) and the other a little after the PTB (at the base of the I. isarcica Zone). The time difference between both events was short (100,000 200,000 years). Most of the extinctions occurred in this time interval.The shallow water of the Tethyan shelves, the refugium for most of the latest Permian warm-water benthos, was cooled down below the critical temperatures for reef communities and the entire warmwater benthos, but in many places the entire warmwater nekton also disappeared on the shelves. Drastically reduced input of sunlight destroyed the feed source and ultimately nearly all the skeleton-bearing plankton (Radiolaria). The climatic catastrophe was more severe in the Northern Hemisphere, where the two huge volcanic centres were situated.The cold-water Otoceras fauna of the Boreal realm was not affected by this climatic catastrophe. The temperate- to cool-water eastern Perigondwana shelf was moderately affected because the number of warm-water adapted species was lower than in the tropical Tethys, and the climatic catastrophe was not as severe as in the Northern Hemisphere. A bipolar fauna was established, as Otoceras from the Boreal realm invaded this area at the base of the Triassic. The low-diversity uppermost Dorashamian terrestrial and freshwater fauna, to a large part already adapted to shorter periods of severe climate (freezing temperatures or drought), survived to a large part (e.g. Lystrosaurus that could also live in high southern latitude areas with polar night, conchostracans with dry- and freezing-resistant eggs, Darwinula that occurred both in tropical and Boreal areas), afterthose faunal elements that were adapted to permanent warm climate had died out earlier during the Dzhulfian and Dorashamian. Only the last representatives of the latter fauna, like Dicynodon, became extinct. The opportunistic swamp flora was not much affected by a short-lasting temperature drop also in low latitudes and acid rain, but some Permian gymnosperms disappeared. Only in the eastern Tethyan humid-tropical Cathaysia province, rather abrupt distinct changes in the flora can be observed. The tropical FilicalesPteridospermophyta rain forest flora largely disappeared, and the tropical highland flora of gymnosperms survived. Therefore, the Cathaysia flora became rich in gymnosperms (sudden increase in bisaccate pollen) during the biotic crisis in connection with the volcanic dust fall-out, whereas in other floral realms the spores (especially of the Lycopodiales swamp flora) became dominant over the bisaccate pollen. The explosive eruptions of the eastern Tethyan volcanic centre were so strong that even the ozone layer was depleted. By the strong UV radiation the mass occurrences of marine (or continental?) fungi suddenly disappeared nearly completely. The drop in water temperature in the central tropical Panthalassa was not so severe that the warm-water fauna disappeared from the narrow shelves of intraoceanic insular areas, where many warm-water taxa survived.The high content of dust in the atmosphere caused strong precipitation in those Boreal areas that were previously rather dry, and in the low-latitude dry girdles. By strong freshwater input in the Boreal sea, the downward sinking of the cold heavy surface water was interrupted or became insignificant. As a consequence, the cold oxygen-rich bottom water currents towards the low latitudes became insignificant. This caused widespread oceanic anoxia that reached to an unusually shallow level and prevented the recovery of the shallow, warm-water benthos in the Tethys.After the end of the Siberian Trap volcanism within the upper Gangetian, the global warming caused by the greenhouse gases (CO2 and high amount of water vapour) was no longer counterbalanced by the volcanic dust and sulphate aerosols. This caused a strong global warming at the beginning of the Gandarian (Dienerian) that was especially strong in the high latitudes. As a consequence, there was a minor extinction event in cold-waterfaunas that had survived the PTB biotic crisis (e.g. hindeodid conodonts), but above all, the oceanic anoxia continued. Thus, the warm-water benthos that had largely survived on the narrow shelves of inner oceanic islands in the tropical Panthalassa could not return to the Tethyan shelves for more than 5 m.y. As oceanic islands are unstable biotopes, during this long time many refuges were destroyed. Thus, finally, the strongly delayed recovery led to a delayed extinction, but many taxa survived this long interval of relative isolation. After the end of the anoxia they re-appeared on the Tethyan shelves during the late Olenekian or during the Middle Triassic. The anoxia was not the reason for the biotic crisis on a global scale (but an important reason for regional extinctions), but played an important role in the global extinction because this caused an unusually long delay in recovery. The survival of the warm-water benthos on inner oceanic insular relic areas explains the high percentage of Lazarus taxa, which constitute in some groups more than 90% of the genera that disappeared close to the PTB.A good example of insular survival of warmwater faunas that died out on the continental shelves long before, was given by Stanley (1993). He reported Sinemurian reefs with Triassic corals from Cordilleran volcanic terranes, whereas on the known shelves less than 1% of the Triassic corals survived into the Jurassic. The difference from the PTB biotic crisis is the rapid recovery of the faunas at the TriassicJurassic boundary because of the absence of a long and severe anoxic event.This scenario explains nearly all details of the extinction patterns in continental and marine biotopes. Only a few details are more difficult to explain. One is the strongly delayed recovery of the siliceous plankton that only began in the upper Olenekian. A possible explanation is that nearly all skeleton-bearing Radiolaria became extinct near the PTB, and the Triassic radiolarian fauna developed new from skeleton-less or spicular radiolarians (Kozur et al., 1996a). As the recovery of the high productivity of terrestrial plants was also in the upper Olenekian, there may be additionally still some unknown environmental factors that prevented the lower and middle Scythian recovery of the marine warm-water benthos, the siliceous plankton and the terrestrial plant communities. 
__label__SUPPORT  Calcareous nannofossils and Mesozoic oceanic anoxic events  Abstract: Twenty-five years ago, Mesozoic oceanic anoxic events (OAEs) were documented and formalised as intervals of widespread to global deposition of organic matter. The Toarcian, Early Aptian (OAE1a) and latest Cenomanian (OAE2) OAEs are truly global in nature, commonly carbonate-poor, and typically represented by organic carbon-rich black shales. In some areas, these OAEs are also characterised by abundant radiolarian-sands and silts. They are associated with negative and positive excursions in the Sr/Sr record, in addition to large global carbon-isotope anomalies in carbonate and/or organic matter, caused by a major perturbation of the global carbon budget. Increased rates of volcanism during the formation of the Ontong Java (and Manihiki) and Caribbean Plates, and the Karoo-Ferrar Traps, are believed to have caused the geological responses associated with OAE1a, OAE2, and the Toarcian OAE, respectively. Excess volcanogenic CO2 in the atmosphere most probably turned the climate into a greenhouse mode, accelerating continental weathering and increasing nutrient content in oceanic surface-waters via river run-off. Higher fertility in the global ocean was also probably triggered directly by submarine igneous events that introduced enormous quantities of biolimiting metals within hydrothermal plumes. Because Mesozoic OAEs are often represented by carbonate-poor sediments, quantitative studies of calcareous nannofossils have been applied to explore (a) the causes and effects of igneous/tectonic events and climate changes, relative to nannofloral increases and crises, as well as (b) dissolution events, and (c) diagenetic modifications. Characterization of calcareous nannofloras in OAE intervals can improve our understanding of the marine ecosystem and biological processes such as photosynthesis (biological pump) and biomineralisation (carbonate pump) that affect the organic and inorganic carbon cycle, as well as adsorption of atmospheric CO2 in the oceans. Types and rates of nannoplankton production and evolution are interpreted to trace the impact of major palaeoceanographic and palaeoclimatic events. In selected sections, it has been documented that calcareous nannofloras rapidly reacted to new conditions of fertility and higher pCO2 by drastically reducing calcification. As in the modern oceans, during OAEs the increase of nutrients and atmospheric CO2 induced higher abundances of nannoplankton producing small placoliths and inhibited the deep-photic zone nannoconids and schizosphaerellids. Similarly to the nannoconid crisis preceding deposition of the Early Aptian OAE1a black shales, a schizosphaerellid crisis is detected prior to the Toarcian OAE. Both OAEs are further characterised by a rapid nannofloral speciation, beginning approximately 1.5 myr before the OAE, but without extinctions. Global changes during the latest Cenomanian OAE 2 exerted different influences on calcareous nannoplankton that experienced a turnover due to most extreme environmental conditions. This event, in fact, was a time of extinctions followed by originations within calcareous 0377-8398/$ see front matter D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.marmicro.2004.04.007 * Fax: +39-2-50315494. E-mail address: elisabetta.erba@unimi.it (E. Erba). E. Erba / Marine Micropaleontology 52 (2004) 85106 86 nannofossils. Precise timing of the events before, during and after OAE1a, OAE2 and the Toarcian OAE indicates that they were intervals of enhanced oceanic productivity and that anoxia/dysoxia post-dated biotic changes. D 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
__label__SUPPORT  Significant radiative impact of volcanic aerosol in the lowermost stratosphere  Abstract: Despite their potential to slow global warming, until recently, the radiative forcing associated with volcanic aerosols in the lowermost stratosphere (LMS) had not been considered. Here we study volcanic aerosol changes in the stratosphere using lidar measurements from the NASA CALIPSO satellite and aircraft measurements from the IAGOS-CARIBIC observatory. Between 2008 and 2012 volcanism frequently affected the Northern Hemisphere stratosphere aerosol loadings, whereas the Southern Hemisphere generally had loadings close to background conditions. We show that half of the global stratospheric aerosol optical depth following the Kasatochi, Sarychev and Nabro eruptions is attributable to LMS aerosol. On average, 30% of the global stratospheric aerosol optical depth originated in the LMS during the period 20082011. On the basis of the two independent, high-resolution measurement methods, we show that the LMS makes an important contribution to the overall volcanic forcing. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8692 OPEN 
__label__SUPPORT  Late Cretaceous to early Paleocene climate and sea-level uctuations: the Tunisian record  Abstract: Climate and sea-level fluctuations across the Cretaceous^Tertiary (K^T) transition in Tunisia were examined based on bulk rock and clay mineralogies, biostratigraphy and lithology in five sections (El Melah, El Kef, Elles, Ain Settara and Seldja) spanning from open marine to shallow inner neritic environments. Late Campanian to early Danian trends examined at El Kef and Elles indicate an increasingly more humid climate associated with sea-level fluctuations and increased detrital influx that culminates at the K^T transition. This long-term trend in increasing humidity and runoff in the Tethys region is associated with middle and high latitude cooling. Results of short-term changes across the K^T transition indicate a sea-level lowstand in the latest Maastrichtian about 25^100 ka below the K^T boundary with the regression marked by increased detrital influx at El Kef and Elles and a short hiatus at Ain Settara. A rising sea-level at the end of the Maastrichtian is expressed at Elles and El Kef by deposition of a foraminiferal packstone. A flooding surface and condensed sedimentation mark the K^T boundary clay which is rich in terrestrial organic matter. The P0^ P1a transition is marked by a sea-level lowstand corresponding to a short hiatus at Ain Settara where most of P0 is missing and a period of non-deposition and erosion in the lower part of P1a (64.95 Ma). At Seldja, P0 and possibly the topmost part of CF1 are missing. These sea-level fluctuations are associated with maximum humidity. These data suggest that in Tunisia, long-term environmental stresses during the last 500 ka before the K^T boundary and continuing into the early Danian are primarily related to climate and sea-level fluctuations. Within this long-term climatic trend the pronounced warm and humid event within the latest Maastrichtian Zone CF1 may be linked to greenhouse conditions induced by Deccan volcanism. The absence of any significant clay mineral variations at or near the K^T boundary and Ir anomaly suggests that the bolide impact had a relatively incidental short-term effect on climate in the Tethys region. 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 11. Conclusions: (1) El Kef and Elles sections contain the most expanded and complete sedimentary records known to date and therefore are the appropriate global standard stratotype and point (GSSP) and additional GSSP sections respectively.(2) Our observations based on biostratigraphical, lithological and mineralogical data indicate that the K^T transition is marked by a sea-level lowstand in the latest Maastrichtian about 25^100 ka below the K^T boundary. This sea-level fall is marked by increased detrital input at El Kef and Elles and a short hiatus at Ain Settara. A rising sea-level marks the end of the Maastrichtian and is expressed at Elles and El Kef by deposition of a foraminiferal packstone. A ooding surface marks the K^T boundary clay associated with condensed sedimentation and maximum inux of terrestrial organic matter. The P0^P1a transition is marked by a sea-level lowstand corresponding to a short hiatus at Ain Settara where the upper part of P0 is missing and a period of non-deposition and erosion marks the lower part of P1a. At Seldja, P0 and possibly the topmost part of CF1 is missing.(3) All the identied clay minerals are known from normal deposition or pedogenic environments and exist in various amounts within the Cretaceous and Paleogene. Thus there are no mineralogical components that are unique or that could be related to an exotic event. Kaolinite increases from the late Maastrichtian into the early Danian and indicates overall increased humidity. Smectite peaks just below the K^T boundary and near the base of Pla indicate a sea-level rise linkedPALAEO 2754 1-5-02with drier climatic conditions. At both El Kef and Elles sections, the K/SM ratios in Zone P0 suggest a series of alternating warm humid and seasonal temperate climate (Fig. 7). Sea-level and climate uctuations inferred from bulk rock and clay mineral data indicate a consistent relationship of low sea-levels with high humidity and high sea-levels with low humidity (increasing seasonality) in the southwestern Tethys region (Fig. 8B).(4) Terrestrial organic matter, as well as Ir and other trace elements, are concentrated at the K^T boundary clay layer which globally coincides with a sea-level rise (maximum ooding) and implies sediment starvation and a condensed interval (Fig. 8B). These trace elements are therefore signicantly elevated as a result of concentration and additional inux due to extraterrestrial event must be evaluated with respect to normal ux.(5) Late Campanian to early Danian trends in bulk rock compositions indicate an increasing detrital inux that culminated during the K^T transition and reect a global change in weathering and climate. At the same time, clay minerals indicate a long-term trend towards a more humid climate which also culminated during the K^T transition. For the same interval, middle and high southern latitude oxygen isotope records indicate long-term climate cooling. This suggests that during the Maastrichtian humidity increased in low latitudes whereas high latitudes cooled. The short-term warming just below the K^T boundary may be linked to Deccan volcanism and may have enhanced already humid conditions in the Tethys region and increased continental runo.(6) The species richness patterns of planktic foraminifera, invertebrates (except inoceramids and rudistids) and palynoora correlate signicantly with the observed changes in climate and weathering. Doubling of species richness between Zones CF6 and CF5, following a major cool event, may be related to increased humidity and precipitation and the resultant increase in terrigenous inux, including terrestrial organic matter. The decrease in species richness in CF2^CF1 and subsequent mass extinction of tropical and subtropical taxa coincides with maximum humidity and terrestrial nutrient export to the oceanswhich may have been associated with Deccan volcanism and a bolide impact. 
__label__SUPPORT  Estimates of volcanic-induced cooling in the Northern Hemisphere over the past 1,500 years  Abstract: Explosive volcanism can alter global climate, and hence trigger economic, political and demographic change1,2. The climatic impact of the largest volcanic events has been assessed in numerous modelling studies and tree-ring-based hemispheric temperature reconstructions36. However, volcanic surface cooling derived from climate model simulations is systematically much stronger than the cooling seen in tree-ring-based proxies, suggesting that the proxies underestimate cooling7,8; and/or the modelled forcing is unrealistically high9. Here, we present summer temperature reconstructions for the Northern Hemisphere from tree-ring width and maximum latewood density over the past 1,500 years. We also simulate the climate e ects of two large eruptions, in AD 1257 and 1815, using a climate model that accounts explicitly for self-limiting aerosol microphysical processes3,10. Our tree-ring reconstructions show greater cooling than reconstructions with lower spatial coverage and based on tree-ring width alone, whereas our simulations show less cooling than previous simulations relying on poorly constrained eruption seasons and excluding nonlinear aerosol microphysics. Our tree-ring reconstructions and climate simulations are in agreement, with a mean NorthernHemisphere extra-tropical summer cooling over land of 0.8 to 1.3 C for these eruptions. This reconciliation of proxy and model evidence paves the way to improved assessment of the role of both past and future volcanism in climate forcing. Drawing on glaciochemical and volcanological evidence, the largest eruptions of the past 1,500 years occurred in Indonesia in 1257 (Samalas11) and April 1815 (Tambora1,12,13). The cooling induced by the Tambora eruption led to the year without a summer1,13, in central and western Europe and northeastern America. Based on sulphate deposition in bipolar ice cores, previous estimates assumed that the radiative forcing from both eruptions was several times greater than that associated with the 1991 Pinatubo eruption. Contradictory results have emerged in previous assessments of the response to such perturbations: whereas global climate models predict a mean Northern Hemisphere (NH) summer cooling of 2.5 C, the temperature response in tree-ring reconstructions has been described as largely muted, being a factor of two to four times smaller8. Here, we investigate the cooling response to large volcanic eruptions in dendroclimatic series by developing new annually resolved 1500-year summer (JuneAugust, JJA) NH extra-tropical (4090N) land temperature reconstructions. These are based on careful selection of published chronologies combined with new data sets from formerly under-represented regions (including Quebec, Qilian Mountains, Central Europe, French Alps; Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). The selection incorporates 233 JJA temperature-sensitive chronologies (127 tree-ring width (TRW) and 106 maximum latewood density (MXD) chronologies) of which an unprecedented 47 cover the thirteenth century. MXD data show a stronger high-frequency response to climate because of lower biological persistence than TRW, making them more suitable for the quantification of abrupt summer cooling induced by volcanic eruptions14. We construct two hemispheric records (NH1, NH2) from site series, grouped into 30 clusters (16 MXD, 14 TRW, amongst which 8 and 12 cover the thirteenth century, respectively; Fig. 1a). The spatial coverage is denser and more balanced than in previous work5 that used only 19 clusters (of which only 8, 1 of them MXD, extended back to 1200) from sites mostly located in northwest America (>60 N). In NH1, a nested reconstruction method was used to stabilize variance, with a new nest created at each decrease in the number of available chronologies (Methods). The 32 nests, calibrated with instrumental JJA temperatures15, passed all verification tests (Methods and Fig. 1b,c and Supplementary Table 2). NH2 (Fig. 1d) represents the average of 22 regional reconstructions; they correlate with series of JJA temperatures15,16 over the areas corresponding to the chronology clusterswithR2 values varying between 0.19 and 0.74 (19011990; p< 0.01; Supplementary Table 3). NH1 and NH2 are significantly correlated (r=0.85, from 500 to 2003). Both reconstructions show pronounced cooling after the largest eruptions of the Common Era. Among the ten coldest years of the NH1 (NH2) reconstruction (5002003), seven (six) coincide with major sulphate spikes identified in ice-core records (Supplementary Table 4). In contrast to previous tree-ring reconstructions of NH temperature5,17, which were not designed for studies of climate response at inter-annual timescales14, our reconstructions reveal cooling induced by eruptions in 535 (unidentified volcano; 
__label__SUPPORT  Seabed gas emissions and submarine landslides off SW Taiwan  Abstract: Methane emissions out of the seabed could seriously affect Earths climate and are usually associated with the dissociation of gas hydrates stored in marine sediments on the continental margins. Spatially, gas emissions out of the seafloor are not evenly distributed in continental margins. Gas emissions out of the seabed generally occur through submarine mud volcanoes and gas seeps. To understand the seabed gas emissions off SW Taiwan, we investigate the distributions of active submarine mud volcanoes, gas seeps, and gas plumes off SW Taiwan. We examine all of the available sub-bottom profiler and EK echo sounder data. We identified 19 submarine mud volcanoes, 220 gas seeps, and 295 gas plumes. The gas emissions are generally distributed at the crests of mud diapiric ridges. Most of the active mud volcanoes and gas seeps cluster at the KASMVG (Kaoping submarine mud volcanoes group) area. We speculate that the intensive mud volcanism and gas seepage at the KASMVG area are ascribed to submarine channel erosion along the continental slope base. The erosion causes a deep V-shaped channel and a steep BSR (Bottom-Simulating Reflector) slope curve across the continental margin. The upward migration rate of free gas beneath the BSR is thus increased and intensifies mud volcanism and gas seepage at the KASMVG area. The gas seeps can reduce the slope stability and generate small-scale slides. The development of mud volcanoes in an area could effectively disturb the seabed morphology so that large-scale submarine landslides cannot easily happen. Article history: Received 16 August 2016 Revised 28 September 2016 Accepted 4 October 2016 4. CONCLUSION: A complete distribution of submarine mud volcanoes, gas seeps and gas plumes off SW Taiwan is compiled, which helps to better understand the seabed gas flow off SW Taiwan. The gas emissions off SW Taiwan occur mainly at the crests of mud diapiric ridges. The submarine mud volcanoes and gas seeps display a clustering phenomenon at the KASMVG area. The middle reach of the Kaoping submarine canyon coincides with the base of the continental slope and is subject to strong erosion. The eroded V-shaped channel has caused a steep BSR slope across the continental slope, which has significantly increased the upward flow rate of free gas beneath the BSR. Consequently, the active mud volcanism and gas seepage have been intensified and clustered at the KASMVG area. The relatively deeper BSRto the SW of the middle reach of the Kaoping Canyon is probably another consequence of the steep channel. The submarine landslides between the Kaoping and Fanliao Canyons are closely related to the gas seeps and mud volcanoes distribution. Large-scale submarine landslides are generally absent in the area full of active mud volcanoes.Acknowledgements This work has received research grants from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan and the gas-hydrate program of Central Geological Survey of Taiwan. The mud volcano, gas seep, and gas plume locations off SW Taiwan are available on request. We appreciate the valuable comments from Dr. Philippe Schnurle and Dr. Wu-Cheng Chi. 
__label__SUPPORT  Phanerozoic Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs), HEATT (Haline Euxinic Acidic Thermal Transgression) episodes, and mass extinctions Introduction: Five mass extinctions stand out in evolutionary history, and many more less-intensemass extinctions are evident in the record. A plethora of causes have been offered as possible explanations for Phanerozoic mass extinctions. Examples include anoxia (e.g. Berry andWilde, 1978; Wignall and Twitchett, 1996), habitat loss (e.g. Valentine and Moores, 1970), cooling (e.g. Stanley, 1988), warming (e.g. Mayhew et al., 2007; Ward, 2007), sea-level change (Newell, 1967; Hallam and Wignall, 1999), hypercapnia (Knoll et al., 1996;Knoll et al., 2007), volcanism(e.g. Courtillot et al., 1986; Courtillot and Renne, 2003), and bolide impact (Alvarez et al., 1980; Raup, 1992). More complete reviews of the broad array of proposed extinction causes have been summarized elsewhere (e.g. McGhee, 1996; Hallam and Wignall, 1997; Erwin, 2006; Ward, 2007). We offered a systemic model for global changes in paleoclimate and paleoceanography that intensified ecological stresses before, during, and after the end-Permian extinction (Kidder andWorsley, 2004). That model demonstrated strong linkages among many of the potential extinction causes noted above (e.g. anoxia, warming, and rising sea level). Since 2004, sufficient new information has convinced us that at least ten and perhaps as many as 16 of the most severe Phanerozoic mass extinctionswere caused by the samemechanismwe proposed forIntroduction: Much of the basis for HEATT episodes comes from the Kidder and Worsley (2004) model for the PermianTriassic interval. That model focused mainly on the interplay among conditions that had been developing since the ending of Permian glaciation. Factors such as expansion of desert belts, climatic warming, poleward movement of forests and many more (Kidder and Worsley, 2004) served as the basis for promoting a long-term weakening of ecosystems that would make them susceptible to extinction. Several points that prompted model refinement are outlined briefly below. Although we did suggest that Siberian Traps volcanism would have intensified some of the developing climatic and oceanographic conditions leading up to the end-Permian extinction, we did not invoke the Siberian Traps as a trigger. Wignall (2001) and Wignall and Twitchett (2002) pointed to the possibility of a direct trigger. Such a trigger is now a key part of our revised model for not only the end Permian, but also for the other HEATT episodes. The end-Permian HEATT episode was probably particularly severe not only because of the magnitude of the Siberian Traps eruptions, but also because of the long and widespread developmentof preconditions in themidlate Permian. Thepronounced 13C shifts that mark the early 9. Conclusions: The HEATT model offers a systemic explanation of the feedbacks that result from the volcanic outpourings associated with major Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs). HEATT episodes are much more likely, and have only been recognized, when LIPs erupt amid the precondition of a Greenhouse climate when silicate weathering is minimal. The Icehouse climate precondition of vigorous, thermal-mode ocean circulation (Zhang et al., 2001) retards HEATT episode development. Active continental collisional orogenies compete with LIPs by favoring glaciation or at least thermal-mode circulation. Under Greenhouse preconditions, emission of greenhouse gases from these LIPs only begins planetary warming. That warming melts polar ice (if present), and latitudinal expansion of warmth and dryness leads to brine formation in evaporative basins connected to the world ocean. These sinking brines deliver heat and sulfate to deep waters. The sinking, warm, oxygen-poor brine (e.g. Brass et al., 1982) becomes the dominant driver of haline-mode ocean circulation (Zhang et al., 2001). This style of circulation is sustainable only as long as the LIP CO2 production remains voluminous. Expansion of anoxia at depth is a conspicuous result of oceans in which minimal oxygen is delivered to the deep sea. Warm brines deliver heat to high latitudes. That warm water rises until obstructed by a strong halocline that developed as high-latitude climates became warm and wet enough to sustain forests (e.g. Taylor and Ryberg, 2007).Numerous positive feedbacks intensify the conditions that lead to and characterize the Hothouse planetary climate state. Reduced poleequator thermal gradients sharply lower planetarywindbelt velocities progressing from Icehouse to Greenhouse to Hothouse planetary states. Wind shear drops as a function of the square of velocity, and wind erosive power falls as the cube of wind velocity. Surface ocean currents weaken as wind strength fades, so delivery of heat to high latitudes by those currents and winds diminishes. The atmosphere's role in poleward heat transport will increase in two ways. First, latent heat transport will increase with increased evaporation in warmer tropics. The increased moisture in polar regions will result in moist climates, and polar clouds will trap heat at those latitudes, minimizing its escape to space. Second, cyclonic storms will play an increasingly important heat-transport role in Greenhouse and Hothouse climates (Kidder and Worsley, 2004; Korty et al., 2008). Weakened winds and warming oceans allow tropical cyclonic storms to form more readily. In Hothouses, cyclones are larger, more frequent, and longer lasting than in Icehouses or Greenhouses. Because deep waters will have warmed in the Hothouse, such cyclones no longer draw up cool water to limit tropical warming as they do today. Instead, they tap warm water so as to become even stronger and reach even deeper. Cyclonic storms escape the tropics in Hothouse climates. At high latitudes, intense cyclonic storms will mine heat from rising warm waters beneath the halocline, further weakening pole-equator thermal gradients and intensifying warming. Expansion of warm waters to high latitudes, helped in part by the storms themselves and also by geothermal heating will enable cyclones to travel to high latitudes. These slow-moving heat engines will be stopped only where they lose moisture by drifting over large landmasses.With the loss of wind-driven upwelling, the cyclonic storms become the chief mechanism for bringing nutrients from deep to shallow waters. The exponentially diminished erosive power of the wind will deliver minimal dust to the oceans, resulting in severe ironlimitation and hence, nitrogen limitation. During the initial onset of a Hothouse, bioavailable nitrogen will occur as reduced forms such as ammonium. The minimal nutrient recycling in the Hothouse requires intensive nitrogen fixation where levels of iron and molybdenumwill permit it. The dominance of usable nutrients by freshly fixed nitrogen will drive down 15N values. With iron, molybdenum, and nitrogen serving as the chief limitation on nutrients, phosphorus will be in excess, leading to gaps in phosphate deposition or even primary precipitation. Primary producers will adjust to these shifts in nutrient cycling with profound results. Red algal forms such as dinoflagellates, diatoms, and coccoliths will have difficulty because the nitrate that normally gives them an advantage over more primitive green algal plankton will diminish. The green algal plankton, which are not well adapted to using nitrate, will thrive on reduced nitrogen species such as ammonium that they are more efficient at using than their red algal cousins. Preliminary results in sterane biomarker analysis confirm this conclusion.As the oceanwarms, thermal expansionwill drive a transgression of about 1030 m, depending on the conditions in a given HEATT episode. If methane hydrates are released from sea-floor sediments by the warming they will further intensify heating and will contribute to a negative 13C anomaly. At some HEATTs, the negative anomaly is offset enough by other factors to generate a positive 13C excursion. We suggest that methane may be a less important factor than is often suggested in the literature. Most or all of the warming can be achieved without the methane because the CO2 sets up the oceanatmosphere feedbacks discussed above that are probably greater than the methane effect. The negative 13C anomalies commonly attributed to methane can be explained by productivity loss (Broecker and Peacock, 1999) and by shifts to light carbon isotopes as luxury feeding is driven by increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. For each doubling of atmospheric CO2, 13C can drop by 1 (e.g. Galimov (1985)). The several doublings suggested by Kidder and Worsley (2004) can easily account for the negative 13C spike at the Permo-Triassic boundary. The intensification of Hothouse conditions such as heat, anoxia, euxinia, shifts in nutrient cycling, ocean acidification, and hypercapnia probably caused mass extinction at least ten times during the Phanerozoic.Fig. 1 illustrates 21 Phanerozoic extinction horizons. The late Edicaran extinction is not shown on that figure, and only one extinction appears where two exist in the late Ordovician. Of those 23 extinctions, 4 are attributable to regression/cooling, and 3 others are problematic. We interpret the remaining 16 as HEATT episodes (Fig. 1; Table 1). We recognize well-defined HEATT episodes during the Cenomanian Turonian, Toarcian, end-Triassic, end-Permian, and Cambrian (Botomian). Frequent and less well-studied HEATTs mark the early Cretaceous during Aptian, Albian, and Valanginian. The late Ordovician and late Devonian were pulsed HEATT episodes that were briefly interrupted by glaciation. The PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum was a HEATT episode that developed quickly, and then aborted before reaching the deadly climax recognized at other HEATTs. The brevity and unsustainability of the PETM may reflect a short-lived trigger such as intrusion of the long-lived North Atlantic Volcanic Province into methane-rich sediments. Each HEATT episode has unique aspects depending on factors such as magnitude of LIP and other competing factors that may generate negative feedback such as orogenic activity and new innovations in plant life that stimulate increases in silicate weathering. The late Ediacaran, Cambro-Ordovician, and Pragian are potential HEATT episodes that have not been investigated as thoroughly as those discussed above.The end-CretaceousHEATT is quiteweak, andwe attribute this to the precondition of a strengthening thermalmode of deep-ocean circulation as middle to late Cretaceous climates cooled and sea level generally fell. The weak HEATT effects instigated by the Deccan Traps were greatly amplified by the Chicxulub impact in the Yucatan carbonates. Vaporization of carbonates released considerable CO2 to the atmosphere, creating a short-lived HEATT episode. Recentmagnetostratigraphic agesshorten and focus the powerful Deccan eruptions to a brief interval quite close to the KPg boundary (Chenet et al., 2008). The anoxia typical of most HEATTs did not develop to any great extent at the end of the Cretaceous. The newly shortened duration of the Deccan Traps trigger maybepart of the reasonwhytheHEATTdidnotdevelopas fully as older ones.The progressive development of a HEATT event should yield a stepwise record of detrimental biotic effects leading up to the extinction climax. During the initial stages of the HEATT episode, the rising atmospheric CO2, warming, and mid-latitude drying should affect terrestrial life, perhaps leading to precursor extinctions on land. Sensitive shallow-marine organisms will be stressed to extinction by heat, ocean acidification, and hypercapnia. Next, as sinking of warm brines intensifies, deep-water benthic species will suffer fromwarming and/or stress from low-oxygen levels. As anoxia expands and euxinia develops, outer-shelf biotasmaybe stressed before inner shelf-dwellers. Outer-shelf extinctionsmay precede inner shelf ones and/or outer-shelf organisms may move into shallower waters until the transgression brings about the peak in extinction.Of the Icehouse, Greenhouse, and Hothouse planetary states, the Greenhouse was the default state for the Phanerozoic climate system. Shifting the world to an Icehouse requires forcing via enhanced silicate weathering, typically generated by major continental collisional orogeny and associated positive biogeochemical feedbacks. Forcing the world from Greenhouse to Hothouse generates a HEATT episode. This requires strong LIP input to stimulate and sustain a full-fledged HEATT episode. Weaker, unsustainable, and short-lived HEATTs can be triggered by bolide impact if preconditions are favorable, but these aborted HEATT episodes leave distinctive characteristics in the record that enable them to be distinguished from fully developed and longer lasting ideal HEATT episodes. The long-term persistence of Hothouse conditions through the Mesoproterozoic suggests that the Hothouse planetary state was the default planetary state then, andmajor impetus was required to shift the planet out of that mode. 
__label__SUPPORT  Synchronous Wildfire Activity Rise and Mire Deforestation at the TriassicJurassic Boundary  Abstract: The end-Triassic mass extinction event (,201.4 million years ago) caused major faunal and floral turnovers in both the marine and terrestrial realms. The biotic changes have been attributed to extreme greenhouse warming across the Triassic Jurassic (TJ) boundary caused by massive release of carbon dioxide and/or methane related to extensive volcanism in the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), resulting in a more humid climate with increased storminess and lightning activity. Lightning strikes are considered the primary source of wildfires, producing charcoal, microscopically recognized as inertinite macerals. The presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) of pyrolytic origin and allochthonous charcoal in siliciclastic TJ boundary strata has suggested widespread wildfire activity at the time. We have investigated largely autochthonous coal and coaly beds across the TJ boundary in Sweden and Denmark. These beds consist of predominantly organic material from the in situ vegetation in the mires, and as the coaly beds represent a substantial period of time they are excellent environmental archives. We document a remarkable increase in inertinite content in the coal and coaly beds across the TJ boundary. We show estimated burning temperatures derived from inertinite reflectance measurements coupled with palynological data and conclude that pre-boundary late Rhaetian mire wildfires included high-temperature crown fires, whereas latest RhaetianSinemurian mire wildfires were more frequent but dominated by lower temperature surface fires. Our results suggest a major change in the mire ecosystems across the TJ boundary from forested, conifer dominated mires to mires with a predominantly herbaceous and shrubby vegetation. Contrary to the overall regional vegetation for which onset of recovery commenced in the early Hettangian, the sensitive mire ecosystem remained affected during the Hettangian and did not start to recover until around the HettangianSinemurian boundary. Decreasing inertinite content through the Lower Jurassic suggests that fire activity gradually resumed to considerable lower levels. Citation: Petersen HI, Lindstrom S (2012) Synchronous Wildfire Activity Rise and Mire Deforestation at the TriassicJurassic Boundary. PLoS ONE 7(10): e47236. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047236 Editor: John P. Hart, New York State Museum, United States of America Received July 6, 2012; Accepted September 10, 2012; Published October 15, 2012 Copyright: 2012 Petersen, Lindstrom. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Funding: The authors have no support or funding to report. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. * E-mail: hip@geus.dk Conclusion: Causes for Increased Fire Activity Across the TJ BoundaryOur results show a significant increase in fire activity in mires across the TJ boundary with a maximum fire frequency in the Hettangian. This was associated with a change from more forested mires in the late Rhaetian to more fern- and shrub-dominated mire floras in the latest Rhaetian, Hettangian and early Sinemurian as indicated both by calculated burning temperatures and palynology. Increased fire activity and deforestation thus appeared to start in the latest Rhaetian below the TJ boundary. These changes are in agreement with other studies that have shown deforestation [7,15,26,69] and charcoal abundance in the latest Rhaetian close to the TJ boundary [16,23,24]. High concentrations of PAHs in Hettangian strata from Poland [24] suggest the most intense fire activity occurred during this period, followed by a decrease, with calculated burning temperatures ranging from 295377uC indicating predominance of surface fires and maybe ground fires [24]. This is in excellent agreement with our results, however our data show continued high wildfire activity in mires during the entire Hettangian (Fig. 5). The causes for the increase in fire activity across the TJ boundary can possibly be linked to two principal factors causing a more wild climate: (1) the establishment of a large sea in a seasonal climate and (2) the contemporaneous CAMP volcanism. It is tempting to select the CAMP volcanism as the main factor as its immediate effect would have been a warmer climate with increased water vapour triggered by extensive CO2 and aerosol release. Evaporation from the sea would possibly have accentuated humidity. High water vapour and seasonality likely increased the frequency of thunderstorms and lightning significantly and it is well-established that lightning strikes are the main cause of wildfire ignition [48]. Initially, thefloral change to less forested mires may have been a shorter-term effect of SO2 pollution associated with CAMP volcanism [7]. The high fire activity possibly helped to sustain more open mire environments, preventing regrowth of arborescent plants. Removal of the canopy may potentially also have made it easier to dry out surface litter in drier months making it more flammable. However, while the regional palynological record indicates early Hettangian recovery of arborescent vegetation, the mire flora remained affected indicating that the environmental changes had a more long-term effect on the sensitive mire ecosystem. The high fire activity and dominance of surface fires during the Hettangian likely indicates a change to at least periodically less waterlogged mires enabling frequent burning of dried surface fuels, maybe promoted by a fluctuating watertable facilitated by a seasonal climate with unevenly distributed rainfall through the year [35]. The TJ boundary was thus a high-stress period that forced the vegetation to adapt to new environmental conditions. Although recovery of the regional terrestrial ecosystem appears to have started already in the early Hettangian [26], recovery of the sensitive mire floras did not commence until around the HettangianSinemurian boundary and decreasing inertinite content through the Lower Jurassic (Fig. 2) suggests that fire activity gradually resumed to considerable lower and possibly more normal levels. 
__label__SUPPORT  Evidence for a spike in mantle carbon outgassing during the Ediacaran period  Abstract: 1Department of Geology, University of Wisconsin Oshkosh, Oshkosh, WI, USA. 2Department of Geological and Mining Engineering and Sciences, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI, USA. 3Institute of Geochemistry and Petrology, Department of Earth Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. *e-mail: paulsen@uwosh.edu The largest reservoir of carbon on Earth resides in the mantle, but how it has evolved over the planets history and influenced global climate remains an unresolved fundamental problem1. According to standard models, there were times when the exogenic carbon inputs (igneous and metamorphic degassing) outweighed the outputs (silicate weathering, burial sequestration and subduction), leading to global warming and rising sea levels2. The balance of exogenic atmospheric inputs and outputs during the Neoproterozoic is of particular interest because this period was marked by major perturbations in the global carbon cycle that have been hypothetically connected to changing climate, atmospheric oceanic oxygenation and biodiversification before the Cambrian explosion of life3,4. Although the details of changes in the partial pressure of atmospheric CO2 (pCO2) throughout the Neoproterozoic are poorly understood, it seems to have risen from relatively low levels as the Earth transitioned from its Snowball Earth state in the Cryogenian (approximately 720635 million years ago (Ma)) to a maximum Phanerozoic level during its greenhouse state in the Cambrian5. Recent analyses of a growing worldwide detrital zircon database have led to the conclusion that late Neoproterozoic Phanerozoic transitions from Earths ice to greenhouse states coincide with increases in zircon abundance6. Long-term global warming has, therefore, been linked to the notion that increases in pCO2 are governed by widespread expansion of continental arc magmatism6,7. Although increasing exogenic CO2 input has commonly been taken to mark surges in carbonate subduction8, significant calcareous pelagic deposition did not commence until the Cretaceous9. Subduction of carbonated ocean crust and mantle, as well as the carbonates stripped off continents and shed into adjacent trenches, offer possible carbon inputs into Precambrian subduction zones. However, there are fundamental uncertainties about the palaeo-temperature and -pressure regimes of ancient arcs and whether they met the conditions that are required for efficient decarbonation of subducted slabs to fuel substantial CO2 emissions1. It has also been noted that time periods of increased carbonatite magmatism seem to correlate with past warmer climates (for example, during the Cretaceous and Eocene10, as well as the Ediacaran11). A plausible causal link exists, as carbonatite melts can degas on ascent, releasing significant amounts of CO2 when they reach relatively shallow depths (< 90 km)12. Carbonatites are typically made up of 50% carbonate minerals13. Therefore, even if the total magma production rate is low, they emit an anomalously large amount of CO2 compared with the average arc magma, which typically has less than 5,000 ppm of CO2. Equally important is the fact that this magma type erupts with other alkaline magmas that are also highly enriched in CO2. The global impact of alkaline and carbonatite magmatism is highlighted by studies that have shown the potential for these magma types to emit tenand up to fifty-times more CO2 into the atmosphere, respectively, than arc magmas16,17. Therefore, the record of alkaline and carbonatite magmatism in the rock record may point to significant, punctuated CO2 releases from the subcontinental mantle reservoir10; a potentially important process operating outside of the steady state within the carbon cycle that warrants investigation. We carried out a coupled UPb age and trace element analysis of 5,715 detrital zircons from 46 sandstone samples (primarily Neoproterozoicearly Palaeozoic in age) widely distributed along a ~3,000-km-long swath of the Neoproterozoicearly Palaeozoic Pacific-Gondwana margin in Antarctica (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). These sandstones are of interest because they are known to contain high concentrations of the prototypical 700500 Ma zircon UPb age population that overlaps with the EdiacaranCambrian global warming phase that has been linked to higher CO2 emissions from continental arcs6. The sources of this zircon age population may include exposed and ice-covered igneous provinces in Antarctica, such as the Ross orogen1820, for Evidence for a spike in mantle carbon outgassing during the Ediacaran period 
__label__SUPPORT  Gas emissions due to magmasediment interactions during flood magmatism at the Siberian Traps Gas dispersion and environmental consequences  Abstract: We estimate the fluxes of extremely reduced gas emissions produced during the emplacement of the Siberian Traps large igneous province, due to magma intrusion in the coaliferous sediments of the Tunguska Basin. Using the results of a companion paper (Iacono-Marziano et al., accepted for publication), and a recent work about low temperature interaction between magma and organic 10 g/yr for a single magmatic/volcanic event. These fluxes are 720 times higher than those calculated for purely magmatic gas emissions, in the absence of interaction with organic matter-rich sediments. We investigate, by means of atmospheric modelling employing present geography of Siberia, the short and mid-term dispersion of these gas emissions into the atmosphere. The lateral propagation of CO and CH4 leads to an important perturbation of the atmosphere chemistry, consisting in a strong reduction of the radical OH concentration. As a consequence, both CO and CH4 lifetimes in the lower atmosphere are enhanced by a factor of at least 3, at the continental scale, as a consequence of 30 days of magmatic activity. The short-term effect of the injection of carbon monoxide and methane into the atmosphere is therefore to increase the residence times of these two species and, in turn, their capacity of geographic expansion. The estimated CO and CH4 volume mixing ratios (i.e. the number of molecules of CO or CH4 per cm , divided by the total number of molecules per cm) in the low atmosphere are 25 ppmv at the continental scale and locally higher than 50 ppmv. The dimension of the area affected by these high volume mixing ratios decreases in the presence of a lava flow accompanying magma intrusion at depth. Complementary calculations for a 10-yr duration of the magmatic activity suggest (i) an increase in the mean CH4 volume mixing ratio of the whole atmosphere up to values 315 times higher than the current one, and (ii) recovery times of 100 yr to bring back the atmospheric volume mixing ratio of CH4 to the pre-magmatic value. Thermogenic methane emissions from the Siberian Traps have already been proposed to crucially contribute to end PermianEarly Triassic global warming and to the negative carbon isotopic shift observed globally in both marine and terrestrial sediments. Our results corroborate these hypotheses and suggest that concurrent high temperature CO emissions also played a key role by contributing to increase (i) the radiative forcing of methane and therefore in its global warming potential, and (ii) the input of isotopically light carbon into the atmosphere that generated the isotopic excursion. We also speculate a poisoning effect of high carbon monoxide concentrations on end-Permian fauna, at a local scale. & 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 5. Conclusions: LIP eruptions coincide with major mass extinctions (Vogt, 1972; Courtillot and Renne, 2003). The possible causal link has been ascribed to both short and long term effects of volcanic gas emissions (Wignall, 2001; Scaillet, 2008). Here we show that the environmental consequences of magmatic activity are, inter alia, strongly dependent on magmahost rock interactions, in particular when the host rocks are composed of carbonates, sulphates, salts, or organic compounds (as already proposed by Svensen et al., 2004, 2007, 2009; Ganino and Arndt, 2009). Such a mechanism leads to atmospheric injection of volatiles in amounts greatly exceeding the original magmatic content and possibly departing significantly from the redox state of the magma source. The atmospheric modelling of COCH4 dominated gas emissions resulting from magmaorganic matter interactions at the Siberian Traps shows that (i) carbon monoxide levels attained in the low atmosphere at the continental scale were comparable to those currently measured in polluted urban areas (25 ppmv), and significantly higher close to the degassing zone (450 ppmv); (ii) important perturbations of atmosphere chemistry were attained leading to substantial decrease in the radical OH concentration; (iii) CO and CH4 lifetimes were consequently enhanced (320 times at the continental scale),therefore increasing the residence time of these two species in the atmosphere. Ten years of magmatic/volcanic activity are calculated to increase by factor of 1050 the mean concentration of methane in the whole atmosphere, yielding a radiative forcing comparable or superior to that due to the increase of both CO2 and CH4 concentration between 1765 and 1990. Short-term poisoning of local fauna by carbon monoxide and long-term global warming by methane are therefore the most likely implications of gas emissions due to magmaorganic matter interactions at the Siberian Traps. 
__label__SUPPORT  Bipolar correlation of volcanism with millennial climate change  Abstract: Analyzing data from our optical dust logger, we find that volcanic ash layers from the Siple Dome (Antarctica) borehole are simultaneous (with >99% rejection of the null hypothesis) with the onset of millennium-timescale cooling recorded at Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2; Greenland). These data are the best evidence yet for a causal connection between volcanism and millennial climate change and lead to possibilities of a direct causal relationship. Evidence has been accumulating for decades that volcanic eruptions can perturb climate and possibly affect it on long timescales and that volcanism may respond to climate change. If rapid climate change can induce volcanism, this result could be further evidence of a southern-lead NorthSouth climate asynchrony. Alternatively, a volcanic-forcing viewpoint is of particular interest because of the high correlation and relative timing of the events, and it may involve a scenario in which volcanic ash and sulfate abruptly increase the soluble iron in large surface areas of the nutrientlimited Southern Ocean, stimulate growth of phytoplankton, which enhance volcanic effects on planetary albedo and the global carbon cycle, and trigger northern millennial cooling. Large global temperature swings could be limited by feedback within the volcanoclimate system. 
__label__SUPPORT  Source, genesis, and timing of giant ignimbrite deposits associated with Ethiopian continental flood basalts  Abstract: The Ethiopian continental flood basalt (CFB) province ( 30 Ma, 3 10 km) was formed as the result of the impingement of the Afar mantle plume beneath the Ethiopian lithosphere. This province includes major sequences of rhyolitic ignimbrites generally found on top of the flood basalt sequence. Their volume is estimated to be at least 6 10km, which represents 20% of that of the trap basalts. Their phenocryst assemblage (alkali feldspar, quartz, aegyrine-augite, ilmenite Ti-magnetite, richterite, and eckermanite) suggests temperatures in the range of 740 to 900C. Four units were recognized in the field (Wegel Tena, Jima, Lima Limo, and Debre Birhan areas), each with its own geochemical specificity. Zr/Nb ratios remain constant between basalt and rhyolite in each area, and rhyolites associated with high-Ti or low-Ti basalts are, respectively, enriched or depleted in titanium. Their trace element and isotope (Sr, Nd, O) signatures (high Nd/Nd and low Sr/Sr ratios, compared to those of rhyolites from other CFB provinces) are clearly different from those of typical crustal melts and indicate that the Ethiopian rhyolites are among the most isotopically primitive rhyolites. Their major and trace element patterns suggest that they are likely to be derived from fractional crystallization of basaltic magmas similar in composition to the exposed flood basalts with only limited crustal contribution. Since Ethiopian high-Ti basalts have been shown to form from melting of a mantle plume, it is likely that Ethiopian ignimbrites, at least those that are Ti-rich, also incorporated material from the deep mantle. Rb-Sr isochrons on whole rocks and mineral separates (30.1 0.4 Ma for Wegel Tena and 30.5 0.4 Ma for Jima ignimbrites) show that most of the silicic volcanism occurred within 2 Ma during the Oligocene. Ignimbritic eruptions resumed in the Miocene during two episodes dated at 15.4 0.2 Ma and 8.0 0.2 Ma for the Debre Birhan area. The Rb-Sr isochron ages of ignimbrites (both Oligocene and Miocene rhyolites) are indistinguishable within uncertainties from the Ar/Ar ages of the underlying flood basalts. The Oligocene ignimbrites and the underlying trap basalts are synchronous with a shift in the oxygen composition of foraminifera recorded in Indian and Atlantic Ocean cores. The temporal coincidence of Ethiopian Oligocene volcanism, which released immense volumes of S ( 1.4 10 mol) and Cl (6.4 10 mol) into the atmosphere over a short time span, with the global cooling event at 30.3 Ma suggests that this volcanism might have accelerated the climate change that was already underway. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd 
__label__SUPPORT  Modeling the temperature response to forced climate change over the last six centuries  Abstract: Development of improved proxy estimates of climate forcing and temperature change over the past six centuries provides a new opportunity to examine the role of forced variability in the climate system. We utilize an energy balance model to estimate that as much as 18-34% of low frequency temperature change over the preanthropogenic interval could be forced by volcanism and solar variability. Comparison of residuals with estimates of unforced variability from control runs of coupled models indicates that the spectra of the two time series agree at the 90% significance level. 
__label__SUPPORT  The timing and extent of the eruption of the Siberian Traps large igneous province: Implications for the end-Permian environmental crisis  Abstract: Article history: We present new high-precis Received 28 March 2008 Received in revised form 30 August 2008 Accepted 24 September 2008 Available online 18 November 2008 Editor: R.W. Carlson 6. Conclusions: 40Ar/39Ar ages presented from the Noril'sk, Tunguska, Taimyr, Kuznetsk, and Vorkuta areas, combined with previous published data,demonstrate that volcanic activity in Siberia covered an area of up to 5 million km2 at 250 Ma (in ArAr years). Our data support previous correlations, and links volcanic units which are over 1000 km apart. Enhanced error estimates provide strong evidence for a short duration of the main-stage volcanic activity at Noril'sk and the wider Siberian Traps province. The main stage volcanism of this province partially predates and is synchronous with the end-Permian extinction. Including Meishan ash Bed 28 sanidine samples, previously studied for zircons, not only has enabled a direct comparison between 40Ar/ 39Ar age of the Traps and the PermoTriassic boundary section, but it also allowed bracketing the timing of deposition between tuff Beds 25 and28 to0.580.21Ma. From thedata presentedwe infer that Siberian Traps volcanismwas responsible for the climatic changes at the end of the Permian. Borehole samples near Chelyabinsk are clearly Triassic in age indicating that volcanism in Siberia occurred in at least two stages.Based on ages obtained from Kuznetsk and Vorkuta, we suggest that the location of the PermoTriassic boundary in these areas (and possibly other terrigenous sections), where the criteria for the boundary include lithostratigraphy, may need to be revised. 
__label__SUPPORT  Volcanic ash as a driver of enhanced organic carbon burial in the Cretaceous  Abstract: On greater than million year timescales, carbon in the ocean-atmosphere-biosphere system is controlled by geologic inputs of CO2 through volcanic and metamorphic degassing. High atmospheric CO2 and warm climates in the Cretaceous have been attributed to enhanced volcanic emissions of CO2 through more rapid spreading at mid-ocean ridges and, in particular, to a global flare-up in continental arc volcanism. Here, we show that global flare-ups in continental arc magmatism also enhance the global flux of nutrients into the ocean through production of windblown ash. We show that up to 75% of Si, Fe and P is leached from windblown ash during and shortly after deposition, with soluble Si, Fe and P inputs from ash alone in the Cretaceous being higher than the combined input of dust and rivers today. Ash-derived nutrient inputs may have increased the efficiency of biological productivity and organic carbon preservation in the Cretaceous, possibly explaining why the carbon isotopic signature of Cretaceous seawater was high. Variations in volcanic activity, particularly continental arcs, have the potential of profoundly altering carbon cycling at the Earths surface by increasing inputs of CO2 and ash-borne nutrients, which together enhance biological productivity and burial of organic carbon, generating an abundance of hydrocarbon source rocks. 
__label__SUPPORT  Volcanoes and ENSO over the Past Millennium  Abstract: The controversial claim that El Nino events might be partially caused by radiative forcing due to volcanic aerosols is reassessed. Building on the work of Mann et al., estimates of volcanic forcing over the past millennium and a climate model of intermediate complexity are used to draw a diagram of El Nino likelihood as a function of the intensity of volcanic forcing. It is shown that in the context of this model, only eruptions larger than that of Mt. Pinatubo (1991, peak dimming of about 3.7 W m ) can shift the likelihood and amplitude of an El Nino event above the level of the models internal variability. Explosive volcanism cannot be said to trigger El Nino events per se, but it is found to raise their likelihood by 50% on average, also favoring higher amplitudes. This reconciles, on one hand, the demonstration by Adams et al. of a statistical relationship between explosive volcanism and El Nino and, on the other hand, the ability to predict El Nino events of the last 148 yr without knowledge of volcanic forcing. The authors then focus on the strongest eruption of the millennium (A.D. 1258), and show that it is likely to have favored the occurrence of a moderate-to-strong El Nino event in the midst of prevailing La Ninalike conditions induced by increased solar activity during the well-documented Medieval Climate Anomaly. Compiling paleoclimate data from a wide array of sources, a number of important hydroclimatic consequences for neighboring areas is documented. The authors propose, in particular, that the event briefly interrupted a solar-induced megadrought in the southwestern United States. Most of the time, however, volcanic eruptions are found to be too small to significantly affect ENSO statistics. 
__label__NEGATE __label__SUPPORT  Mercury anomalies across the PalaeoceneEocene Thermal Maximum  Abstract: Large-scale magmatic events like the emplacement of the North Atlantic Igneous Province (NAIP) are often coincident with periods of extreme climate change such as the PalaeoceneEocene Thermal Maximum (PETM). One proxy for volcanism in the geological record that is receiving increased attention is the use of mercury (Hg) anomalies. Volcanic eruptions are among the dominant natural sources of Hg to the environment; thus, elevated Hg/TOC values in the sedimentary rock record may reflect an increase in volcanic activity at the time of deposition. Here we focus on five continental shelf sections located around the NAIP in the Palaeogene. We measured Hg concentrations, total organic carbon (TOC) contents, and 13C values to assess how Hg deposition fluctuated across the PETM carbon isotope excursion (CIE). We find a huge variation in Hg anomalies between sites. The Grane field in the North Sea, the most proximal locality to the NAIP analysed, shows Hg concentrations up to 90 100 ppb (Hg/TOC= 95 700 ppb wt %1) in the early Eocene. Significant Hg/TOC anomalies are also present in Danish (up to 324 ppb wt %1) and Svalbard (up to 257 ppb wt %1) sections prior to the onset of the PETM and during the recovery period, while the Svalbard section also shows a continuous Hg/TOC anomaly during the body of the CIE. The combination with other tracers of volcanism, such as tephra layers and unradiogenic Os isotopes, at these localities suggests that the Hg/TOC anomalies reflect pulses of magmatic activity. In contrast, we do not observe clear Hg anomalies on the New Jersey shelf (Bass River) or the Arctic Ocean (Lomonosov Ridge). This large spatial variance could be due to more regional Hg deposition. One possibility is that phreatomagmatic eruptions and hydrothermal vent complexes formed during the emplacement of sills led to submarine Hg release, which is observed to result in limited distribution in the modern era. The Hg/TOC anomalies in strata deposited prior to the CIE may suggest that magmatism linked to the emplacement of the NAIP contributed to the initiation of the PETM. However, evidence for considerable volcanism in the form of numerous tephra layers and Hg/TOC anomalies post-PETM indicates a complicated relationship between LIP volcanism and climate. Factors such as climate system feedbacks, changes to the NAIP emplacement style, and/or varying magma production rates may be key to both the onset and cessation of hyperthermal conditions during the PETM. However, processes such as diagenPublished by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union. 218 M. T. Jones et al.: Mercury anomalies across the PalaeoceneEocene Thermal Maximum esis and organic matter sourcing can have a marked impact on Hg/TOC ratios and need to be better constrained before the relationship between Hg anomalies and volcanic activity can be considered irrefutable. 6 Conclusions: This study presents Hg/TOC anomalies across the PETM from five continental shelf sections. Extremely high Hg concentrations are present in the Grane core in the North Sea and significant Hg/TOC anomalies are observed in Svalbard, Denmark, and Egypt (Keller et al., 2018). No such clear anomalies are observed in the Lomonosov Ridge or Bass River sections, although these localities are complicated by incomplete core recovery and low TOC concentrations, respectively. With the exception of the Egypt section, the magnitude of Hg/TOC anomalies generally correlates with proximity to the NAIP, and the coincidence of other volcanic proxies indicates that the NAIP is the most likely source of the observed Hg/TOC anomalies. However, processes such as diagenesis and organic matter sourcing can have a marked impact on Hg/TOC ratios and need to be better constrained before this relationship can be considered irrefutable. The large variation in magnitudes of Hg/TOC anomalies between localities indicates that Hg deposition was regionally constrained. One possible explanation is that phreatomagmatic eruptions and submarine degassing from hydrothermal vent complexes meant greater transference of Hg to seawater, leading to localized deposition. Different organic matter sourcing may have muted Hg/TOC signals at some of these sites, but this effect is unlikely to cause positive Hg/TOC anomalies during the PETM.There are two distinct disruptions to the Hg cycle preserved in sections that are proximal to the NAIP. Tephra layers and Hg/TOC anomalies are most prevalent before the onset of the CIE and during the CIE recovery. In addition, the Svalbard and Egypt sections have Hg/TOC ratios that are consistently elevated during the CIE body. The most likely candidates for the observed Hg/TOC anomalies are the emplacement of an extensive flood basalt province along the margins of the nascent northeast Atlantic Ocean and the thermogenic gas release due to widespread sill intrusions. The anomalous Hg/TOC a few millennia prior to the CIE provides additional support for NAIP magmatism possibly triggering a positive carbon cycle feedback, which released 13C-depleted carbon from a surface reservoir. Evidence for elevated magmatism at the end of the CIE, however, highlights the fact that the relationship between postulated volcanic forcing and the climate is complex. Factors such as (the sensitivity of) feedbacks in the climate system, a change in the emplacement style of the NAIP, and/or magma production rates may be key to both the onset and cessation of hyperthermal conditions during the PETM.Data availability. All of the research data presented in this paper is publically available in the Supplement.Supplement. The supplement related to this article is available online at: https://doi.org/10.5194/cp-15-217-2019-supplement.Author contributions. MTJ, LMEP, TAM, and HHS conceptualized and laid out the methodology of the project. MTJ, LMEP, EWS, JF, LR, BAS, BS, CT, SP, and HHS contributed to data collection and interpretations. Writing (original draft) was prepared by MTJ, LMEP, EWS, and JF. All authors contributed to the writing in the review and editing stage.Competing interests. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Acknowledgements. We thank two anonymous reviewers and the editor Alberto Reyes for their thorough and constructive comments on this paper. Grace Shephard, Thea Heimdal, Mike Cassidy, Valentin Zuchuat, Olivia Jones, Claus Heilman-Clausen, Adriano Mazzini, Stephane Polteau, and Appy Sluijs are warmly thanked for their assistance. Svalbard and Grane field samples were donated by Store Norske AS and Equinor ASA, respectively. This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway through its Centres of Excellence funding scheme, project number 223272. Morgan T. Jones and Ella W. Stokke are funded by the Research Council of Norway Yngeforsktalenter project Ashlantic, project number 263000.Edited by: Alberto Reyes Reviewed by: two anonymous referees 
__label__SUPPORT  Phanerozoic Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs), HEATT (Haline Euxinic Acidic Thermal Transgression) episodes, and mass extinctions Introduction: Five mass extinctions stand out in evolutionary history, and many more less-intensemass extinctions are evident in the record. A plethora of causes have been offered as possible explanations for Phanerozoic mass extinctions. Examples include anoxia (e.g. Berry andWilde, 1978; Wignall and Twitchett, 1996), habitat loss (e.g. Valentine and Moores, 1970), cooling (e.g. Stanley, 1988), warming (e.g. Mayhew et al., 2007; Ward, 2007), sea-level change (Newell, 1967; Hallam and Wignall, 1999), hypercapnia (Knoll et al., 1996;Knoll et al., 2007), volcanism(e.g. Courtillot et al., 1986; Courtillot and Renne, 2003), and bolide impact (Alvarez et al., 1980; Raup, 1992). More complete reviews of the broad array of proposed extinction causes have been summarized elsewhere (e.g. McGhee, 1996; Hallam and Wignall, 1997; Erwin, 2006; Ward, 2007). We offered a systemic model for global changes in paleoclimate and paleoceanography that intensified ecological stresses before, during, and after the end-Permian extinction (Kidder andWorsley, 2004). That model demonstrated strong linkages among many of the potential extinction causes noted above (e.g. anoxia, warming, and rising sea level). Since 2004, sufficient new information has convinced us that at least ten and perhaps as many as 16 of the most severe Phanerozoic mass extinctionswere caused by the samemechanismwe proposed forIntroduction: Much of the basis for HEATT episodes comes from the Kidder and Worsley (2004) model for the PermianTriassic interval. That model focused mainly on the interplay among conditions that had been developing since the ending of Permian glaciation. Factors such as expansion of desert belts, climatic warming, poleward movement of forests and many more (Kidder and Worsley, 2004) served as the basis for promoting a long-term weakening of ecosystems that would make them susceptible to extinction. Several points that prompted model refinement are outlined briefly below. Although we did suggest that Siberian Traps volcanism would have intensified some of the developing climatic and oceanographic conditions leading up to the end-Permian extinction, we did not invoke the Siberian Traps as a trigger. Wignall (2001) and Wignall and Twitchett (2002) pointed to the possibility of a direct trigger. Such a trigger is now a key part of our revised model for not only the end Permian, but also for the other HEATT episodes. The end-Permian HEATT episode was probably particularly severe not only because of the magnitude of the Siberian Traps eruptions, but also because of the long and widespread developmentof preconditions in themidlate Permian. Thepronounced 13C shifts that mark the early 9. Conclusions: The HEATT model offers a systemic explanation of the feedbacks that result from the volcanic outpourings associated with major Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs). HEATT episodes are much more likely, and have only been recognized, when LIPs erupt amid the precondition of a Greenhouse climate when silicate weathering is minimal. The Icehouse climate precondition of vigorous, thermal-mode ocean circulation (Zhang et al., 2001) retards HEATT episode development. Active continental collisional orogenies compete with LIPs by favoring glaciation or at least thermal-mode circulation. Under Greenhouse preconditions, emission of greenhouse gases from these LIPs only begins planetary warming. That warming melts polar ice (if present), and latitudinal expansion of warmth and dryness leads to brine formation in evaporative basins connected to the world ocean. These sinking brines deliver heat and sulfate to deep waters. The sinking, warm, oxygen-poor brine (e.g. Brass et al., 1982) becomes the dominant driver of haline-mode ocean circulation (Zhang et al., 2001). This style of circulation is sustainable only as long as the LIP CO2 production remains voluminous. Expansion of anoxia at depth is a conspicuous result of oceans in which minimal oxygen is delivered to the deep sea. Warm brines deliver heat to high latitudes. That warm water rises until obstructed by a strong halocline that developed as high-latitude climates became warm and wet enough to sustain forests (e.g. Taylor and Ryberg, 2007).Numerous positive feedbacks intensify the conditions that lead to and characterize the Hothouse planetary climate state. Reduced poleequator thermal gradients sharply lower planetarywindbelt velocities progressing from Icehouse to Greenhouse to Hothouse planetary states. Wind shear drops as a function of the square of velocity, and wind erosive power falls as the cube of wind velocity. Surface ocean currents weaken as wind strength fades, so delivery of heat to high latitudes by those currents and winds diminishes. The atmosphere's role in poleward heat transport will increase in two ways. First, latent heat transport will increase with increased evaporation in warmer tropics. The increased moisture in polar regions will result in moist climates, and polar clouds will trap heat at those latitudes, minimizing its escape to space. Second, cyclonic storms will play an increasingly important heat-transport role in Greenhouse and Hothouse climates (Kidder and Worsley, 2004; Korty et al., 2008). Weakened winds and warming oceans allow tropical cyclonic storms to form more readily. In Hothouses, cyclones are larger, more frequent, and longer lasting than in Icehouses or Greenhouses. Because deep waters will have warmed in the Hothouse, such cyclones no longer draw up cool water to limit tropical warming as they do today. Instead, they tap warm water so as to become even stronger and reach even deeper. Cyclonic storms escape the tropics in Hothouse climates. At high latitudes, intense cyclonic storms will mine heat from rising warm waters beneath the halocline, further weakening pole-equator thermal gradients and intensifying warming. Expansion of warm waters to high latitudes, helped in part by the storms themselves and also by geothermal heating will enable cyclones to travel to high latitudes. These slow-moving heat engines will be stopped only where they lose moisture by drifting over large landmasses.With the loss of wind-driven upwelling, the cyclonic storms become the chief mechanism for bringing nutrients from deep to shallow waters. The exponentially diminished erosive power of the wind will deliver minimal dust to the oceans, resulting in severe ironlimitation and hence, nitrogen limitation. During the initial onset of a Hothouse, bioavailable nitrogen will occur as reduced forms such as ammonium. The minimal nutrient recycling in the Hothouse requires intensive nitrogen fixation where levels of iron and molybdenumwill permit it. The dominance of usable nutrients by freshly fixed nitrogen will drive down 15N values. With iron, molybdenum, and nitrogen serving as the chief limitation on nutrients, phosphorus will be in excess, leading to gaps in phosphate deposition or even primary precipitation. Primary producers will adjust to these shifts in nutrient cycling with profound results. Red algal forms such as dinoflagellates, diatoms, and coccoliths will have difficulty because the nitrate that normally gives them an advantage over more primitive green algal plankton will diminish. The green algal plankton, which are not well adapted to using nitrate, will thrive on reduced nitrogen species such as ammonium that they are more efficient at using than their red algal cousins. Preliminary results in sterane biomarker analysis confirm this conclusion.As the oceanwarms, thermal expansionwill drive a transgression of about 1030 m, depending on the conditions in a given HEATT episode. If methane hydrates are released from sea-floor sediments by the warming they will further intensify heating and will contribute to a negative 13C anomaly. At some HEATTs, the negative anomaly is offset enough by other factors to generate a positive 13C excursion. We suggest that methane may be a less important factor than is often suggested in the literature. Most or all of the warming can be achieved without the methane because the CO2 sets up the oceanatmosphere feedbacks discussed above that are probably greater than the methane effect. The negative 13C anomalies commonly attributed to methane can be explained by productivity loss (Broecker and Peacock, 1999) and by shifts to light carbon isotopes as luxury feeding is driven by increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. For each doubling of atmospheric CO2, 13C can drop by 1 (e.g. Galimov (1985)). The several doublings suggested by Kidder and Worsley (2004) can easily account for the negative 13C spike at the Permo-Triassic boundary. The intensification of Hothouse conditions such as heat, anoxia, euxinia, shifts in nutrient cycling, ocean acidification, and hypercapnia probably caused mass extinction at least ten times during the Phanerozoic.Fig. 1 illustrates 21 Phanerozoic extinction horizons. The late Edicaran extinction is not shown on that figure, and only one extinction appears where two exist in the late Ordovician. Of those 23 extinctions, 4 are attributable to regression/cooling, and 3 others are problematic. We interpret the remaining 16 as HEATT episodes (Fig. 1; Table 1). We recognize well-defined HEATT episodes during the Cenomanian Turonian, Toarcian, end-Triassic, end-Permian, and Cambrian (Botomian). Frequent and less well-studied HEATTs mark the early Cretaceous during Aptian, Albian, and Valanginian. The late Ordovician and late Devonian were pulsed HEATT episodes that were briefly interrupted by glaciation. The PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum was a HEATT episode that developed quickly, and then aborted before reaching the deadly climax recognized at other HEATTs. The brevity and unsustainability of the PETM may reflect a short-lived trigger such as intrusion of the long-lived North Atlantic Volcanic Province into methane-rich sediments. Each HEATT episode has unique aspects depending on factors such as magnitude of LIP and other competing factors that may generate negative feedback such as orogenic activity and new innovations in plant life that stimulate increases in silicate weathering. The late Ediacaran, Cambro-Ordovician, and Pragian are potential HEATT episodes that have not been investigated as thoroughly as those discussed above.The end-CretaceousHEATT is quiteweak, andwe attribute this to the precondition of a strengthening thermalmode of deep-ocean circulation as middle to late Cretaceous climates cooled and sea level generally fell. The weak HEATT effects instigated by the Deccan Traps were greatly amplified by the Chicxulub impact in the Yucatan carbonates. Vaporization of carbonates released considerable CO2 to the atmosphere, creating a short-lived HEATT episode. Recentmagnetostratigraphic agesshorten and focus the powerful Deccan eruptions to a brief interval quite close to the KPg boundary (Chenet et al., 2008). The anoxia typical of most HEATTs did not develop to any great extent at the end of the Cretaceous. The newly shortened duration of the Deccan Traps trigger maybepart of the reasonwhytheHEATTdidnotdevelopas fully as older ones.The progressive development of a HEATT event should yield a stepwise record of detrimental biotic effects leading up to the extinction climax. During the initial stages of the HEATT episode, the rising atmospheric CO2, warming, and mid-latitude drying should affect terrestrial life, perhaps leading to precursor extinctions on land. Sensitive shallow-marine organisms will be stressed to extinction by heat, ocean acidification, and hypercapnia. Next, as sinking of warm brines intensifies, deep-water benthic species will suffer fromwarming and/or stress from low-oxygen levels. As anoxia expands and euxinia develops, outer-shelf biotasmaybe stressed before inner shelf-dwellers. Outer-shelf extinctionsmay precede inner shelf ones and/or outer-shelf organisms may move into shallower waters until the transgression brings about the peak in extinction.Of the Icehouse, Greenhouse, and Hothouse planetary states, the Greenhouse was the default state for the Phanerozoic climate system. Shifting the world to an Icehouse requires forcing via enhanced silicate weathering, typically generated by major continental collisional orogeny and associated positive biogeochemical feedbacks. Forcing the world from Greenhouse to Hothouse generates a HEATT episode. This requires strong LIP input to stimulate and sustain a full-fledged HEATT episode. Weaker, unsustainable, and short-lived HEATTs can be triggered by bolide impact if preconditions are favorable, but these aborted HEATT episodes leave distinctive characteristics in the record that enable them to be distinguished from fully developed and longer lasting ideal HEATT episodes. The long-term persistence of Hothouse conditions through the Mesoproterozoic suggests that the Hothouse planetary state was the default planetary state then, andmajor impetus was required to shift the planet out of that mode. 
__label__SUPPORT  Gas emissions due to magmasediment interactions during flood magmatism at the Siberian Traps Gas dispersion and environmental consequences  Abstract: We estimate the fluxes of extremely reduced gas emissions produced during the emplacement of the Siberian Traps large igneous province, due to magma intrusion in the coaliferous sediments of the Tunguska Basin. Using the results of a companion paper (Iacono-Marziano et al., accepted for publication), and a recent work about low temperature interaction between magma and organic 10 g/yr for a single magmatic/volcanic event. These fluxes are 720 times higher than those calculated for purely magmatic gas emissions, in the absence of interaction with organic matter-rich sediments. We investigate, by means of atmospheric modelling employing present geography of Siberia, the short and mid-term dispersion of these gas emissions into the atmosphere. The lateral propagation of CO and CH4 leads to an important perturbation of the atmosphere chemistry, consisting in a strong reduction of the radical OH concentration. As a consequence, both CO and CH4 lifetimes in the lower atmosphere are enhanced by a factor of at least 3, at the continental scale, as a consequence of 30 days of magmatic activity. The short-term effect of the injection of carbon monoxide and methane into the atmosphere is therefore to increase the residence times of these two species and, in turn, their capacity of geographic expansion. The estimated CO and CH4 volume mixing ratios (i.e. the number of molecules of CO or CH4 per cm , divided by the total number of molecules per cm) in the low atmosphere are 25 ppmv at the continental scale and locally higher than 50 ppmv. The dimension of the area affected by these high volume mixing ratios decreases in the presence of a lava flow accompanying magma intrusion at depth. Complementary calculations for a 10-yr duration of the magmatic activity suggest (i) an increase in the mean CH4 volume mixing ratio of the whole atmosphere up to values 315 times higher than the current one, and (ii) recovery times of 100 yr to bring back the atmospheric volume mixing ratio of CH4 to the pre-magmatic value. Thermogenic methane emissions from the Siberian Traps have already been proposed to crucially contribute to end PermianEarly Triassic global warming and to the negative carbon isotopic shift observed globally in both marine and terrestrial sediments. Our results corroborate these hypotheses and suggest that concurrent high temperature CO emissions also played a key role by contributing to increase (i) the radiative forcing of methane and therefore in its global warming potential, and (ii) the input of isotopically light carbon into the atmosphere that generated the isotopic excursion. We also speculate a poisoning effect of high carbon monoxide concentrations on end-Permian fauna, at a local scale. & 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 5. Conclusions: LIP eruptions coincide with major mass extinctions (Vogt, 1972; Courtillot and Renne, 2003). The possible causal link has been ascribed to both short and long term effects of volcanic gas emissions (Wignall, 2001; Scaillet, 2008). Here we show that the environmental consequences of magmatic activity are, inter alia, strongly dependent on magmahost rock interactions, in particular when the host rocks are composed of carbonates, sulphates, salts, or organic compounds (as already proposed by Svensen et al., 2004, 2007, 2009; Ganino and Arndt, 2009). Such a mechanism leads to atmospheric injection of volatiles in amounts greatly exceeding the original magmatic content and possibly departing significantly from the redox state of the magma source. The atmospheric modelling of COCH4 dominated gas emissions resulting from magmaorganic matter interactions at the Siberian Traps shows that (i) carbon monoxide levels attained in the low atmosphere at the continental scale were comparable to those currently measured in polluted urban areas (25 ppmv), and significantly higher close to the degassing zone (450 ppmv); (ii) important perturbations of atmosphere chemistry were attained leading to substantial decrease in the radical OH concentration; (iii) CO and CH4 lifetimes were consequently enhanced (320 times at the continental scale),therefore increasing the residence time of these two species in the atmosphere. Ten years of magmatic/volcanic activity are calculated to increase by factor of 1050 the mean concentration of methane in the whole atmosphere, yielding a radiative forcing comparable or superior to that due to the increase of both CO2 and CH4 concentration between 1765 and 1990. Short-term poisoning of local fauna by carbon monoxide and long-term global warming by methane are therefore the most likely implications of gas emissions due to magmaorganic matter interactions at the Siberian Traps. 
__label__SUPPORT  Bipolar correlation of volcanism with millennial climate change  Abstract: Analyzing data from our optical dust logger, we find that volcanic ash layers from the Siple Dome (Antarctica) borehole are simultaneous (with >99% rejection of the null hypothesis) with the onset of millennium-timescale cooling recorded at Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2; Greenland). These data are the best evidence yet for a causal connection between volcanism and millennial climate change and lead to possibilities of a direct causal relationship. Evidence has been accumulating for decades that volcanic eruptions can perturb climate and possibly affect it on long timescales and that volcanism may respond to climate change. If rapid climate change can induce volcanism, this result could be further evidence of a southern-lead NorthSouth climate asynchrony. Alternatively, a volcanic-forcing viewpoint is of particular interest because of the high correlation and relative timing of the events, and it may involve a scenario in which volcanic ash and sulfate abruptly increase the soluble iron in large surface areas of the nutrientlimited Southern Ocean, stimulate growth of phytoplankton, which enhance volcanic effects on planetary albedo and the global carbon cycle, and trigger northern millennial cooling. Large global temperature swings could be limited by feedback within the volcanoclimate system. 
__label__NEGATE  Vegetation and climate change, fire-regime shifts and volcanic disturbance in ChiloE Continental (43S) during the last 10,000 years  Abstract: Disentangling the roles of paleofires and explosive volcanism from climatic drivers of past vegetation change is a subject insufficiently addressed in the paleoecological literature. The coastal region of the Chilo e Continental sector of northwestern Patagonia is ideal in this regard considering its proximity to active eruptive centers and the possibility of establishing comparisons with more distal, upwind sites where volcanic influence is minimal. Here we present a fine-resolution pollen and macroscopic charcoal record from Lago Teo with the aim of documenting the local vegetation and climate history, and assessing the role of disturbance regimes as drivers of vegetation change during the last ~10,000 years. The Lago Teo record shows a conspicuous warm/dry interval between ~7500 and 10,000 cal yrs BP followed by a cooling trend and increase in precipitation that has persisted until the present, in agreement with previous studies in the region and interpretations of past southern westerly wind activity at multi-millennial scales. The presence of 26 tephras throughout the record allows examination of the relationship between explosive volcanism and vegetation change under contrasting climatic states of the Holocene. We found consistent statistically significant increases in Tepualia stipularis after tephra deposition over the last 10,000 years, in Eucryphia/Caldcluvia between 7500 and 10,000 cal yrs BP and in Hydrangea over the last 7500 years. Our results indicate a primary role of climate change as driver of long-term vegetation change and as a modulator of vegetation responses to volcanic disturbance at multidecadal and centennial timescales. 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 6. Conclusions: The pollen record from Lago Teo shows multi-millennial dominance of Valdivian rainforest between 7500 and 10,000 cal yrs BP, followed by a gradual replacement by North Patagonian rainforests over the last ~7500 years in the Andean foothills of Chilo e Continental. Aspects of this transition can be explained by a multimillennial cooling trend concomitant with a shift from weakerthan-present SWW during the early Holocene to stronger SWW since 7500 cal yrs BP (Moreno, 2004).The tephrostratigraphy of Lago Teo shows 26 airfall deposits which precede conspicuous changes in the fossil pollen record. We found consistent statistically significant declines in T. stipularis and increases in Eucryphia/Caldcluvia following the deposition of tephras between 7500 and 10,000 cal yrs BP, and increases in T. stipularis over the last 10,000 years. We also observe consistent and significant increases in Hydrangea after the deposition of tephras between 0 and 7500 cal yrs BP and after tephras originating from the Michinmahuida Volcanic Center, and consistent significant increases inW. trichosperma after tephras originating from the Volc an Chait en. Thick tephras also precede major vegetation changes, however, the paucity of these events prevents us from drawing firm conclusions. In sum, our results suggest that explosive volcanism has influenced the structure and composition of the temperate rainforests of Chilo e Continental over the last 10,000 years, and that the response of different opportunistic tree species is modulated by the mean climate state.We identify high paleofire activity between 8250 and 9850 cal yrs BP and during the last 520 years, and lack of consistent statistical significance association between tephra deposition and local fire. This sporadic nature of local fire close to Lago Teo contrasts with the multi-millennial pattern at regional scale (Power et al., 2008; Whitlock et al., 2007), suggesting that climate and vegetation changes in this hyperhumid sector of Chilo e Continental were not conducive for persistent long-term shifts in fire regime during the last 10,000 years and that explosive volcanism did not influence fire regimes near Lago Teo during the Holocene. 
__label__SUPPORT  Source, genesis, and timing of giant ignimbrite deposits associated with Ethiopian continental flood basalts  Abstract: The Ethiopian continental flood basalt (CFB) province ( 30 Ma, 3 10 km) was formed as the result of the impingement of the Afar mantle plume beneath the Ethiopian lithosphere. This province includes major sequences of rhyolitic ignimbrites generally found on top of the flood basalt sequence. Their volume is estimated to be at least 6 10km, which represents 20% of that of the trap basalts. Their phenocryst assemblage (alkali feldspar, quartz, aegyrine-augite, ilmenite Ti-magnetite, richterite, and eckermanite) suggests temperatures in the range of 740 to 900C. Four units were recognized in the field (Wegel Tena, Jima, Lima Limo, and Debre Birhan areas), each with its own geochemical specificity. Zr/Nb ratios remain constant between basalt and rhyolite in each area, and rhyolites associated with high-Ti or low-Ti basalts are, respectively, enriched or depleted in titanium. Their trace element and isotope (Sr, Nd, O) signatures (high Nd/Nd and low Sr/Sr ratios, compared to those of rhyolites from other CFB provinces) are clearly different from those of typical crustal melts and indicate that the Ethiopian rhyolites are among the most isotopically primitive rhyolites. Their major and trace element patterns suggest that they are likely to be derived from fractional crystallization of basaltic magmas similar in composition to the exposed flood basalts with only limited crustal contribution. Since Ethiopian high-Ti basalts have been shown to form from melting of a mantle plume, it is likely that Ethiopian ignimbrites, at least those that are Ti-rich, also incorporated material from the deep mantle. Rb-Sr isochrons on whole rocks and mineral separates (30.1 0.4 Ma for Wegel Tena and 30.5 0.4 Ma for Jima ignimbrites) show that most of the silicic volcanism occurred within 2 Ma during the Oligocene. Ignimbritic eruptions resumed in the Miocene during two episodes dated at 15.4 0.2 Ma and 8.0 0.2 Ma for the Debre Birhan area. The Rb-Sr isochron ages of ignimbrites (both Oligocene and Miocene rhyolites) are indistinguishable within uncertainties from the Ar/Ar ages of the underlying flood basalts. The Oligocene ignimbrites and the underlying trap basalts are synchronous with a shift in the oxygen composition of foraminifera recorded in Indian and Atlantic Ocean cores. The temporal coincidence of Ethiopian Oligocene volcanism, which released immense volumes of S ( 1.4 10 mol) and Cl (6.4 10 mol) into the atmosphere over a short time span, with the global cooling event at 30.3 Ma suggests that this volcanism might have accelerated the climate change that was already underway. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd 
__label__NEGATE __label__SUPPORT  Three centuries of observation of stratospheric transparency  Abstract: A chronology of stratospheric aerosol optical depth for the period 16711881 is derived from total lunar eclipse colors. It is compared with available proxy time series for the same period and with more refined data for more recent years. Contrary to previous speculations, the stratosphere from 1671 to 1881 seems to have been mostly undisturbed volcanically, with only two or three eruptions having injected into it truly significant amounts of aerosol-producing and climate-altering sulfur gases. It is confirmed that the full record for 16712000 shows a marked, though possibly quasiregular, 80 year periodicity in stratospheric aerosol optical depth, which appears also in polar ice-core acidity records and in volcanic eruption frequencies. 
__label__SUPPORT  Reconstructing Late Ordovician carbon cycle variations  Abstract: The role of carbon dioxide in regulating climate during the early Paleozoic, when severe glaciations occurred during a putative greenhouse world, remains unclear. Here, we present the first molecular carbon isotope proxy-based estimates for Late Ordovician (early Katian) pCO2 levels, and explore the limitations of applying this approach to the reconstruction of Paleozoic pCO2. Carbon isotope profiles from three sites in Laurentia (Iowa, Ontario and Pennsylvania) and one site in Baltica (Estonia) exhibit overall low isotope fractionation between organic and inorganic carbon during photosynthesis (ep) and these values declined during the early Katian carbonate carbon isotope excursion (or Guttenberg Carbon Isotope Excursion, GICE). Algal ep values are sensitive to changes in CO2 concentrations, algae cell morphologies, and cell growth rates. To constrain these factors, we present molecular evidence that a decrease in the relative abundance of cyanobacteria and a change in the eukaryotic algae community co-occurred with the GICE. Regardless of local biotic or oceanographic influences, a decline in ep values indicates photosynthesis was sensitive to carbon concentrations, and via analogy with modern taxa, constrains pCO2 to below 8 pre-industrial levels (PIL), or about half of previous estimates. In addition, the global, positive carbon isotope excursions expressed in a wide variety of sedimentary materials (carbonate, bulk organic matter, n-alkanes, acyclic and cyclic isoprenoid hydrocarbons), provide compelling evidence for perturbation of the global carbon cycle, and this was likely associated with a decrease in pCO2 approximately 10 million years prior to the Hirnantian glaciations. Isotopic records from deeper water settings suggest a complex interplay of carbon sources and sinks, with pCO2 increasing prior to and during the early stages of the GICE and then decreasing when organic carbon burial outpaced increased volcanic inputs. 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 5. CONCLUSIONS: We have developed new isotopic and biomarker records for the GICE, a major biotic event and carbon cycle perturbation, from which we have constrained pCO2 and reconstructed global carbon cycle changes. Our results confirm that global carbon-cycle reconstructions are complicated by ecological and environmental changes during the GICE. Absolute CO2 reconstructions are hindered by these paleoenvironmental changes, as well as by insufficient isotopic characterization of algal lineages dominant in Ordovician seas. Using biomarkers, we suggest an approach for applying carbon isotopic data to reconstruct Paleozoic climate and carbon cycling. First, bulk organic matter d13C records should be supplemented with compound-specific isotope records where possible. Our focus in this study has been the organic component of D13C records and future work will benefit from similar scrutiny of the inorganic component (e.g. Ludvigson et al., 1996). Second, biomarker assemblages can provide evidence for ecological change that could affect photoautotroph d13C values. Third, lithologic indicators can be used to constrain oceanographic conditions that influence phytoplankton productivity and ocean carbon chemistry. Such conditions include the influence of temperature, productivity and upwelling on the exchange of CO2 between the atmosphere and ocean, and the resulting disequilibrium that is especially important in the marginal settings that dominate the preserved record of Paleozoic rocks. Finally, we emphasize that globally diverse carbon isotopic records are needed if global interpretations are to be made.Applying this approach, we confirmed that Late Katian ep values were lower and more dynamic at multiple and oceanographically diverse sites than expected for a high pCO2 world. Our observations suggest that Ordovician pCO2 levels were likely below 8 PIL. Although great caution accompanies our proposed quantitative pCO2 constraint, we suggest our records provide more robust insights to relative pCO2 changes because environmental and ecological factors have been partially precluded. Based on that, we infer the following sequence of events during the Katian: (1) possible volcanism-induced pCO2 rise as indicated by a D13C increase; (2) ocean warming; (3) increased productivity, expanded ocean anoxia and increased carbon burial, manifesting as the GICE; and (4) subsequent pCO2 decrease that apparently lags the GICE onset and (5) possible cooling. This sequence is similar to that observed during Mesozoic OAEs (e.g. Jenkyns, 2010; van Bentum et al., 2012) and suggests that the punctuated occurrence of OAEs during extended greenhouse climate intervals has been a characteristic of the Earths climate for nearly the past 500 million years. In fact, the similarity of those records suggests a mechanistic link: warming and/or sea level rise during the GICE apparently was associated with increased or reorganized nutrient inputs in the ocean (Patzkowsky and Holland, 1996, 1997), and, as has been invoked for Cretaceous OAEs (Kuypers et al., 2002; Jenkyns, 2010; Monteiro et al., 2012), this could have induced the productivity increase that brought about a major global carbon isotope excursion. 
__label__SUPPORT  Modeling the temperature response to forced climate change over the last six centuries  Abstract: Development of improved proxy estimates of climate forcing and temperature change over the past six centuries provides a new opportunity to examine the role of forced variability in the climate system. We utilize an energy balance model to estimate that as much as 18-34% of low frequency temperature change over the preanthropogenic interval could be forced by volcanism and solar variability. Comparison of residuals with estimates of unforced variability from control runs of coupled models indicates that the spectra of the two time series agree at the 90% significance level. 
__label__SUPPORT  The timing and extent of the eruption of the Siberian Traps large igneous province: Implications for the end-Permian environmental crisis  Abstract: Article history: We present new high-precis Received 28 March 2008 Received in revised form 30 August 2008 Accepted 24 September 2008 Available online 18 November 2008 Editor: R.W. Carlson 6. Conclusions: 40Ar/39Ar ages presented from the Noril'sk, Tunguska, Taimyr, Kuznetsk, and Vorkuta areas, combined with previous published data,demonstrate that volcanic activity in Siberia covered an area of up to 5 million km2 at 250 Ma (in ArAr years). Our data support previous correlations, and links volcanic units which are over 1000 km apart. Enhanced error estimates provide strong evidence for a short duration of the main-stage volcanic activity at Noril'sk and the wider Siberian Traps province. The main stage volcanism of this province partially predates and is synchronous with the end-Permian extinction. Including Meishan ash Bed 28 sanidine samples, previously studied for zircons, not only has enabled a direct comparison between 40Ar/ 39Ar age of the Traps and the PermoTriassic boundary section, but it also allowed bracketing the timing of deposition between tuff Beds 25 and28 to0.580.21Ma. From thedata presentedwe infer that Siberian Traps volcanismwas responsible for the climatic changes at the end of the Permian. Borehole samples near Chelyabinsk are clearly Triassic in age indicating that volcanism in Siberia occurred in at least two stages.Based on ages obtained from Kuznetsk and Vorkuta, we suggest that the location of the PermoTriassic boundary in these areas (and possibly other terrigenous sections), where the criteria for the boundary include lithostratigraphy, may need to be revised. 
__label__SUPPORT  Volcanic ash as a driver of enhanced organic carbon burial in the Cretaceous  Abstract: On greater than million year timescales, carbon in the ocean-atmosphere-biosphere system is controlled by geologic inputs of CO2 through volcanic and metamorphic degassing. High atmospheric CO2 and warm climates in the Cretaceous have been attributed to enhanced volcanic emissions of CO2 through more rapid spreading at mid-ocean ridges and, in particular, to a global flare-up in continental arc volcanism. Here, we show that global flare-ups in continental arc magmatism also enhance the global flux of nutrients into the ocean through production of windblown ash. We show that up to 75% of Si, Fe and P is leached from windblown ash during and shortly after deposition, with soluble Si, Fe and P inputs from ash alone in the Cretaceous being higher than the combined input of dust and rivers today. Ash-derived nutrient inputs may have increased the efficiency of biological productivity and organic carbon preservation in the Cretaceous, possibly explaining why the carbon isotopic signature of Cretaceous seawater was high. Variations in volcanic activity, particularly continental arcs, have the potential of profoundly altering carbon cycling at the Earths surface by increasing inputs of CO2 and ash-borne nutrients, which together enhance biological productivity and burial of organic carbon, generating an abundance of hydrocarbon source rocks. 
__label__NEGATE __label__SUPPORT  Volcanoes and ENSO over the Past Millennium  Abstract: The controversial claim that El Nino events might be partially caused by radiative forcing due to volcanic aerosols is reassessed. Building on the work of Mann et al., estimates of volcanic forcing over the past millennium and a climate model of intermediate complexity are used to draw a diagram of El Nino likelihood as a function of the intensity of volcanic forcing. It is shown that in the context of this model, only eruptions larger than that of Mt. Pinatubo (1991, peak dimming of about 3.7 W m ) can shift the likelihood and amplitude of an El Nino event above the level of the models internal variability. Explosive volcanism cannot be said to trigger El Nino events per se, but it is found to raise their likelihood by 50% on average, also favoring higher amplitudes. This reconciles, on one hand, the demonstration by Adams et al. of a statistical relationship between explosive volcanism and El Nino and, on the other hand, the ability to predict El Nino events of the last 148 yr without knowledge of volcanic forcing. The authors then focus on the strongest eruption of the millennium (A.D. 1258), and show that it is likely to have favored the occurrence of a moderate-to-strong El Nino event in the midst of prevailing La Ninalike conditions induced by increased solar activity during the well-documented Medieval Climate Anomaly. Compiling paleoclimate data from a wide array of sources, a number of important hydroclimatic consequences for neighboring areas is documented. The authors propose, in particular, that the event briefly interrupted a solar-induced megadrought in the southwestern United States. Most of the time, however, volcanic eruptions are found to be too small to significantly affect ENSO statistics. 
